Self View

The first fetter is the most artificial, yet most convincing, illusion of all: that there is a separate “self” that we have or are, that goes by our name, and is the agent, controller or experiencer of all that is happening.  If all the other nine fetters are in place - all of the subject/object dualities, the likes and dislikes, and everything else - all of that goes into the illusion of a separate and abiding “self” that has and in fact is all of those.  For example, with the 6th fetter, by which it seems there is a “subject” (which all else is in relation to as an “object”), that “subject” is something we have, and in fact are.

If we were to look at the fetters in reverse, the process of believing in and assembling a “self” started at the 8th fetter with the intangible yet convincing belief that “I Exist”.  How and why “I Exist” comes to fruition here as the 1st fetter, in that we essentially draw a dotted line around all those attributes and say “that’s me!”  We become so committed to this separate “self” that we use everything in experience to continually prove and bolster it.  Simply raising our right hand is assumed to be something that the self causes and does, with the hand also being something that the self owns and thus is.

As with all fetters, the view that there is a separate 'self" comes about because of the inborn tendency to do so.  Here, our tendency is to conclude that someone has and indeed is all the various thoughts, reactions, and everything else that occurs in our experience.  For example, having become convinced in the 7th fetter that “consciousness” is real, and that sensory experience via physical (and mental) spheres of consciousness is a valid perspective and explanation as to what is happening and why, we naturally assume there has to be someone behind it all, in charge of consciousness and directing it to what we are conscious of.

Seeing that there really is no “self” which directs and has our experience can be as simple as raising your right arm and looking for the “self” that made that happen.  This is not a conceptual exercise, for example by reflecting on how there cannot be such a real self because everything is impermanent.  Instead, we use our natural introspective ability to directly look, in simple, everyday experience, for the self that raised that arm, and who exactly raising our right arm apparently proves or attests to.  Similarly, when a thought naturally arises, we can look for the “self” that gave rise to that thought, instead of simply assuming that “it was me!”.  We might suppose there is such a "self", but we will never actually find one!

When we see this fact clearly, this fetter finally breaks, and the separate “self” is seen to have been nothing more than inference and interpretation.  We then see how the truth has been right under our nose all along: there’s simply nobody (t)here!  Because there never was a “self” in the first place, no longer believing that we have or are a separate “self” is not a destructive or negative experience: there is no ‘self’ that died, and there is no new ‘self’ that takes its place.  In fact, for many if not most people, this is a very positive experience, in that we not only start to see what the Buddha was trying to teach us, but are also finally relieved of the burden of a “self” to which we always catered and which seemed to require an endless amount of time and energy to maintain.  

This can also illustrate the need for caution as to how far we take the metaphor of self-growth, self-transformation and self-development, which may be initially helpful if we tend towards nihilism.  These sorts of concepts can eventually hinder our ability to let go of the belief that there is a “self” that could grow or develop, in that we may believe there is an impermanent or changing “self” that could possibly do so, a belief that can be quite difficult to let go of.  

As a point of comparison, in the Buddhist tradition, the path described by the first three Mahayana stages (bhumis), as a result of getting this first irreversible understanding of who we are(n’t), there is a joyfulness, an initial cleansing of wrong views, and an illumination of what is (and is not) happening within and around us.  Though this illumination is of a preliminary nature, it nevertheless constitutes a significant re-ordering of how we perceive ourselves and our place in the world.  In the Mahamudra yogas, this is the stage of one-pointedness, which I take to mean that we finally have a foothold in what the Dharma means, by which we can start to narrow our focus on what is most important and helpful, even if that means no longer engaging with certain practices or approaches that we were initially or naturally drawn to.

--

What evidence is there that we exist? 

It generally comes down to observing that we think, speak and act in certain ways, and concluding that there is a “self” of some sort.  It can seem as though there must be someone that has, and even is, all of that.  

If we rely on what we observe or experience, we reach an empirical conclusion, and in this case conclude that we have and in fact are an empirical self.  And of course, since what we think, say and do never stays the same, a self that is empirically derived or inferred will not stay the same either.  As a result, we might conclude that our empirical self is also an impermanent self.  

From there, the tendency may be to seek to discover or realize “who I really am”, by which the spiritual path becomes one of self-realization.  And if we are the sum total of all that we think, say and do, the aspiration to refine and improve that self naturally results in a path of self-improvement.

It may not occur to us that this empirical and impermanent self is really just a product of inference, and that there is really no “self” at all, be it permanent, impermanent or otherwise, and that awakening means realizing that there is no “self” whatsoever.  In particular, the belief in the empirical self is the initial illusion which we must dispel as the first irreversible shift or step on the path to awakening.  This isn’t to say that, when we awaken, our lives aren’t more peaceful, or that we won’t be more kind and compassionate.  Rather, the more positive qualities that arise are the result of dispelling the belief in a self, rather than seeking to discover and improve upon one.  After that, we can start to reveal the the underlying sense of "me" that must eventually be dispelled as well

The Empirical Self

When we start on the path to awakening it can seem that, for example, we are our actions, and this is the way we might think of or refer to a person: someone who is the sum total of their actions of body, speech, and mind, and who doesn't exist apart from these.  As a result, we also come to believe that there is someone that is the agent or controller of those actions.  For example, simply raising our right hand can be used as proof that there is a “self” that made that happen.  By this, everything we see, hear, think or otherwise experience can be used to bolster the sense of “that’s me!”.

As a conclusion we reach based on what we observe, concluding there is such a self is empirical knowledge.  In other words, it is not something that we inherently or intuitively know, but something that we come to know as a result of observing what is happening in and around us.  In this case, we come to believe we have (and in fact are) an “empirical self” that is both real and verifiable.  

And yet, if we look in and among all that is happening, there isn’t such a “self” at all: we just assume there is.  Once we conclusively see this, what we think, say and do continues just as it all did before: all of that observable experience still happens.  Also, the sense that there is something much more fundamental, which resonates with the affirmation “I Am”, remains.  However, the belief that there is someone that goes by our name and that controls, has and even is all of that observable experience goes away.  

As described in the Buddhist tradition, we are born with the underlying tendency to infer or conclude that there is such a “self”, based on what we observe.  That there is such a “self” is quite convincing, by which its supposed existence has become a focus of Western thought.  For example, the idea that there is an “empirical self” was suggested by Immanuel Kant, who theorized that there is not just this consciousness of oneself and one’s psychological states as empirical self-knowledge, but that there is also a more fundamental consciousness in the form of what he termed “transcendental apperception”.  

This was echoed some years later by William James, who explored the “empirical self” that each of us have, and which is composed of everything that we are tempted to call by the name of “me”.  He suggested that, in the widest possible sense, someone’s self is all that they possibly can call theirs, such as their body, their possession, their family and their reputation.  He contrasted this empirical self with what he referred to as the nominative self or “I”, the pure principle of personal identity, or the pure ego.  

A contemporary definition from the field of psychology is that the empirical self is the self that is known by the self that is the knower.  Thus, as with Kant and James, there is a distinction between an empirical self that we observe, “in action” as it were, and a type of self that is assumed to be the observer, knower or witness.

Holding On to the Empirical Self

That there appears to be two types or levels of a self is, in fact, exactly what we find as we awaken.  The difference, though, is that while Western thought might posit the actual existence of these two types of self (or that these descriptors will at least always apply), through inquiry we come to see that the empirical self (as the 1st fetter), as well as underlying sense of "me" (as the 8th fetter) are both illusions. 

That there is no “self” may not make sense prior to the initial paradigm shift when we "break" the 1st fetter.  In fact, the prospect of seeing that there is no “self” that is in charge or has our experience may evoke a bit of fear.  For example, we might be concerned that we will experience being annihilated or killed.  Or, we might fear that once we experience the initial insight shift there will be nothing whatsoever, that experience will go completely blank, or that our memories will be wiped clean.  Or, we may simply not be able to imagine what it would be like to not have a “self” of one kind or another.  The notion of an empirical self that is real, and which changes and grows, can therefore present us with an opportunity to retain the belief in a self which, from our current perspective, may not seem to be an illusion.  

For example, according to one approach that I am familiar with, we should assume that we do in fact have such a self, as the sum total of our activities such as our thinking, our seeing, our feeling, our willing, and our imagining.  In Buddhist terminology, all of that would be assumed to be our svabhāva, our “self-nature” or “own-being”.  This then opens up the possibility that, beyond our present mode of existence and experience, there are other deeper dimensions of being which we can grow towards.  Such deeper dimensions are inconceivable if we think of ourselves being fixed or permanent, and we shut ourselves off from that something deeper by asserting “No, this is me.”  By this, we just have to avoid abstracting an absolute, permanent or unchanging self, which is apart from and somehow activating all of our activities.  

Such an approach would therefore be concerned with the growth of the impermanent self, rather than realizing that there is no self whatsoever. We would refine the empirical self and make it ever more positive - it would seem as though the components of this real empirical self are the raw materials that we need to work on and transform into something beautiful, and are as necessary to our spiritual growth as clay is to a potter.  We might even speak of something that grows, and assume we will be able to sort out the metaphysics of that “something” once we access those deeper dimensions of being. 

The Glass Ceiling of the Self

There are various reasons that the approach of developing and refining an empirical self does not lead to, or even allow, the initial shift along the path to awakening.  Perhaps the most important reason is that the notion of a permanent self is not the only obstacle to awakening.  Believing that there is a constantly changing empirical self, by definition, means that the belief in a self nevertheless persists.  By superimposing the concept of “impermanence” onto what and who we presume we are, we invent an impermanent self, a version of the self that is just as believable (if not more so) than a permanent self.  

In other words, an impermanent "something" is still a something, and we may not realize that we have abstracted an impermanent “self” as being ultimately real and true.  We might tell ourselves that we or others are impermanent and therefore not substantial, but that doesn’t change the fact that we still believe in the existence of a self, one that is impermanent.

As an example, imagine being part of a large crowd at a concert venue.  We know that there is no such thing as a pre-existing “crowd” that has always existed and always will exist.  Instead, we know that a crowd only “exists” when people file into the venue, and that the crowd changes as people come and go.  Even though it’s not a permanent crowd, we nevertheless recognize a “crowd”.  We might deconstruct the crowd in our head, recognizing that it is the sum of its components (i.e., people), apart from which it is merely a name.  We may thus conclude that it is simply a momentary collocation of causal factors, such as a stadium and the people inside, that has no “crowd-ness” to it that makes it a crowd.  

However, while we can tell and even convince ourselves that it’s not really a "crowd” per se, it doesn’t change the fact that we nevertheless recognize and experience a “crowd”.  Similarly, we might tell ourselves that there isn’t or can’t be a permanent or abiding “self”, and that we only have or are an impermanent “self” as the sum of certain components or a collocation of certain factors.  However, the perception of an impermanent self is still the perception of a self.  

Also, if we believe that there is an impermanent self, such a belief will likely be much more difficult to eradicate than the belief in a permanent self, in that something that is impermanent is more difficult to find or pin down.  For example, if something is impermanent, and by inference without any substance, it will be more likely that we will subconsciously just allow it to exist, because we know we’ll never find it if we look for it.  Also, the apparent proof of an empirical and impermanent self (i.e., all that we think, say, do and otherwise experience) is always present, which constantly reinforces the belief.

Affirming that there is an empirical self means that the spiritual path can become a matter of understanding the law or principle, such as impermanence, emptiness, or cause-and-effect conditionality, that explains the existence of not just that self, but of everything else that we experience as well.  If so, it essentially sends us off in a completely different direction, by which the path is concerned with seeing the nature of reality and “the way things really are”, as opposed to seeing “the way I really am not”.  

If the intent is to refine an empirical self, the spiritual path might then be largely about engaging in “good works” in order to transform ourselves.  This can lead to engaging with all sorts of activities, especially “spiritual” activities, that we believe will transform us.  Though this can be of some benefit to ourselves and others, it can also end up further reinforcing the idea that “I” am being transformed into a better person.

Finally, refining an empirical self can also set up idealistic expectations as to what we will be like when that refinement occurs with the first shift.  For example, in the approach I am familiar with, our new self that arises out of the ashes of the previous self will be continually aware, emotionally positive and creative of our new self, and be free of negative mental states.  we will experience a natural, clean, and even serene withdrawal from involvement in the affairs of daily life. There is also the expectation that we will have a perfect and unblemished ethical and moral life, and be seen as an infallible source of guidance and example for others.  If we have such unrealistic expectations of ourselves and others, and strive to cultivate these idealized qualities, we will go in a much different direction than awakening.

Letting Go of the Empirical Self

While there may be additional reasons why seeking to refine a changing, empirical self can take us in the wrong direction, in the end this simply is not what happens as we start to awaken.  Once the initial “insight” shift occurs, we realize that the belief in a “self” of whatever sort was not just an illusion, but was the the problem all along.  What is happening is in fact happening, and it continues to do so, but none of it is or needs to be associated with a self that is permanent, impermanent, empirical or otherwise.  Daily life is remarkably similar to what it was before, and rather than a new self arising out of the ashes of the old one, the illusion of self evaporates altogether, with nothing taking its place.

The good news is that our body is still recognized, our thoughts, memories and emotions still appear, and we don’t lose track of the important people and things in our life.  The only real change is that there is no longer the sense of someone who has or is all of that, or that is the agent or experiencer behind it all.  This initial shift is irreversible, just as we can never go back to believing in Santa Claus or the Tooth Fairy, and in the Buddhist tradition is known by terms such as "entering the stream" or going through the Gateless Gate.  As far as those around us might be concerned, they may not necessarily notice that anything has changed, including the fact that we are not ethically perfect, serene or continually aware.  However, the difference in our lived experience after this shift is substantial, a difference that is difficult if not impossible to understand unless one has had the experience themselves.  

Buddhist literature of course uses references to a “self” in a conventional way.  For example, in a verse from the Dhammapada, the Buddha is recorded to have said: “O monk, by yourself, exhort yourself, and examine yourself; thus guarding yourself and being mindful, you will live in peace”.  And yet, despite the repeated use of the term “yourself”, the Buddha did not perceive whoever heard that statement as having or being a “self” of any sort, whether permanent, impermanent or otherwise, because the Buddha himself no longer experienced any sort of actual “self”.  This is despite the fact that the hearer of that statement may well have seen both the Buddha and themselves as having or being a “self” of some sort.  

This illustrates that, once we awaken, we don’t forget what is meant by an “empirical self” or how others perceive themselves and therefore us.  We can still use first-person pronouns to describe “ourselves” with the same ease we always had, even if such ideas have no more actual meaning than talking about Santa Claus once we learn “he” doesn’t exist either.  We will have many of the same preferences and tendencies, and to the outside world we will appear to have and be a “self”; however, we won’t have any sense of self or “I” whatsoever.   Thus, the use of the term “self” as a convention of speech is one thing, while erroneously believing that there actually is a self of some sort, whether permanent, impermanent or otherwise, is quite another.  

-- 

Doubt and Perplexity

​The 2nd fetter, translated as doubt and perplexity, is how it is we manage to be presented with the truth about ourselves and the world around us but are not able to take it in.  With the establishment of this fetter, that we exist as a separate and unique being is now a foregone conclusion, and a completely plausible explanation of what is happening in experience and why.  It might be said that here we put in place the final brick of the foundation for living life as if the existence of a separate “self” really were true.  

With the 3rd fetter firmly in place as to what our life does or should consist of, whether that be our daily rituals or what “spiritual practice” necessarily looks like for us, with the 2nd fetter we are able to distance ourselves from the alternatives.  We can now reference our own impressive stockpile of likes and dislikes and how we go about navigating life with those, and either get perplexed about the mismatch with what spiritual teachings offer and in fact be skeptical of them, particularly if they say we don't exist as we believe we do. We have concluded what “reality” is, and that we can be independent players in that reality.  It might be said that we are no longer receptive to what is actually true.

The 2nd fetter is thus the self-referent illusion that there is something about us, a doubting/perplexity ability or mechanism, by which when we are exposed to the truth, rather than taking that in we can resist or deflect it.  For example, take a moment to reflect on how many times you have heard that there is no separate self; that is true, and yet were you simply able to take that in, or was it as if there was a part of you that was able to keep it at bay, by which it couldn’t sink in?  It can feel as if we can somehow resist or deflect the truth, because we have some faculty of deflection or defiance that comes into play.  

It might also feel as though we’ve drawn a line in the sand between what is true and what is not, at least as far as we are concerned.  In essence, we have developed a defense mechanism for those times (perhaps thousands of times per day) when life indicates we might be wrong about ourselves and the world around us, for example in assuming that we can find permanence, satisfactoriness or substance in what is happening.  It is as if our armor has been donned: we can now rationalize most any view that we have.  All that remains, for the 1st fetter, is to draw a dotted line around all that we have attached to and call it “myself”.  

The 2nd fetter traditionally falls away when we see through the illusion of the “self” at the 1st fetter, because there is no longer a self as a set of views to defend, thus the armor can be seen as pointless.  Put another way, when the separate "self" is seen to be a concept, this layer of conceptualization cannot hold its ground either.   As a result, inquiring directly into the 2nd fetter and "breaking" it is not typically done, and what this fetter is might only be clear in retrospect.  However, looking at how we defend and deflect when it comes to inquiring into whether we are what we think we are is nevertheless valuable.

--

Attachment to Rites and Rituals
​
The 3rd fetter describes how we identify with (and even as) our rites and rituals, whether they be of a day-to-day sort or (as it is typically seen as a “fetter”) the rites and rituals of our spiritual life.   With desire and ill will as the 4th and 5th fetters in place, we come to have a definite view as to what we like and what we don’t like, such that we will naturally be drawn towards some things and repelled by others.  

For example, we might gravitate towards certain spiritual practices and reject others, or on a more mundane level seize upon certain rituals in daily life as ostensible “proof” that we exist as we believe we do.  Whatever the form it takes, it allows the inborn tendency for “this is what I do, and this is what I don’t do” to become a motive force in our lives.  Though on the surface it may seem that we go through life only vaguely aware of what we do, those rites and rituals have a definite purpose: to support the notion of a separate and unique “self”.  

The self-referent illusion here is that there is something we have that resonates with, or perhaps even is the storehouse for, what we do and don’t do, such as a particular ethical or religious observance, such that we become attached to it.  It is as if something about us resonates and identifies with the rite or ritual, such that the activity benefits, defines and reinforces “who we are”.  It is therefore natural to further conclude, with this as a basis, that there is a “self” which does all that, and is the controller, agent and experiencer of it all (i.e., as the first fetter).  

Among other things, this fetter can lead us to pursue a path in which we seek to “find out who we really are”, rather than who we really aren’t.  We might adopt the notion of “my spiritual practice”, in which we do what we are inclined to do which, rather than dismantling the illusion of a “self”, can tend to reinforce it.  With desire and ill will in place, a particular rite or ritual might be something we really want to be happening, and which makes us feel good; practice becomes a matter of what we want to do, and pushing away what we don’t want to do.  

The particular practice itself, such as meditating, study, visualization, or devotional practice, is of course not a problem per se: it’s that we attach to that practice and use it to bolster the sense of a separate self.  We make it a problem, in other words.  In doing so, we might even go so far as to say that the spiritual life must include meditation, devotional practice, study or another element because we can’t imagine not doing it.  In more mundane terms, it might be that we insist on having our coffee or tea a certain way, and subconsciously use what is really just a preference as a way to reinforce our experience as being a separate and unique person.

Traditionally, when the 1st fetter falls, we realize that the rites and rituals we were attached to weren’t reinforcing anything (or anyone), such that the 3rd fetter falls as well.   It might be said that we realize that there was never anyone who had been "doing" these things in the first place, thus the view that "I" can develop, have a spiritual practice or be discovered falls away.  As with the 2nd fetter, focusing on how we grasp at rites and rituals, whether of a spiritual or mundane type, isn’t necessarily a primary focus of inquiry.  Of course, observing how attached we are to the way in which spiritual progress ostensibly “must” occur can nevertheless be helpful and even necessary.