Desire and Ill Will - Sample Dialogue 1

​Hi!  What you wrote is very helpful to understand where you're at and in general what things have been like in the last year or two. 

You mentioned that you are certainly aware of ill will, irritation, and craving arising, which is great.  Would you say they are more prominent, less, or about the same as they were before going through Liberation Unleashed?  Put another way, do you feel like you are more sensitized to when they arise, less so, or about the same?  Just curious how the pushing and pulling at experience feels now that a "self" isn't overlain on everything...

And since you mentioned ill will first: how does ill will manifest in your life?  Is it a gentle undercurrent, periods of relative calm punctuated by very strong emotional experiences, etc.?  And is there a particular issue, person or situation that comes up the most, gets you hottest under the collar, keeps you up at night, or however it manifests?  In other words, if there was one situation in your life that, if you had a magic wand, you could "fix", what is that situation? 

I look forward to reading your responses :-)

- - - - - - - -

Ok - so yes, ill will is certainly still present in my experience.  I am not a great fan of these various personality labelling systems, but from the 'three type' version we sometimes use in the movement, I would say I fell into the 'Hate type' category. I think this is more apparent than craving.

I am pretty sure this manifests less strongly than before, but I think I am much more fed up about it, and aware of it when it manifests. It mostly appears in relation to people, and it does seem to be a bit of a 'default mode' - when encountering others a judgmental process will kick in, more often than not with some critical element. 

It particularly happens at work, with my colleagues there.  There have been a number of occasions over the past few years when two particular colleagues have caused a strong response in me, and one in particular in the last few months. For one reason or another (partly because of this incident), I have avoided interacting with them as I can, so the intensity of the sensation has diminished, but contacts will be getting more frequent over the coming couple of weeks - so it will be interesting to see!  If "fixing" were an option it would certainly be good to see my responses to others, particularly those who 'press my buttons' getting more generous and less reactive.

- - - - - - - -

It's great you're aware that, if there was a valid three-label model, which label generally applies.  That there is a current person(s) with whom this is manifesting may be a good inroad.  

When you are ready, please generally/briefly describe the most challenging situation.  What do they typically do or say, and what have been/are your responses?  What are some of the thoughts or stories that go through your head? 

As you write it down, just going on memory, does it feel about the same or different than 'in-person' in terms of the energy in your reactions & responses?

- - - - - - - -

I’m adding this postscript in here at the beginning! I actually found this much harder to write. I would keep getting into reflective and explaining mode, so would stop and try to recapture the actual feeling. So it has taken longer, and may well take more work"

It’s fine, the momentum is carrying me forward so far, and it’s good to be getting into this stuff

I see one issue looming already however, even as I start to consider what to write and how to convey it - which is that when put down it’s clear how feeble and superficial these events are. Nonetheless, they still seem to have the power to stir me up, so here we go.

The most ‘profitable’ situation to consider is a long running interaction with two people at work, which has caused numerous episodes of distress and anger over some years, and seems quite likely to continue to do so. The interactions with ‘1’ and ‘2’ have a number of similarities, but some differences in detail. The more recent have been with ‘1’ so I will explore those in more detail. 

‘1’ has been there longer than I have, and has some standing in the department.  Reflecting on the episodes now results in a sense of some embarrassment, as I suspect the responses I was experiencing were probably mirrors of his own, but nonetheless I will try to report matters as I experienced them

So - he has been a presence ever since I first went to work there. I have always had the sense that he had a rather negative view of me and how I go about things.  The most recent episode was provoked when I was coordinating a project with another group, and had those others do a fair bit of the work.  1 erupted about the role they were taking, and my part in bringing them in. My reaction was initially of shock, and then anger and frustration about his responses to my actions in general.  In talking to our supervisor, he again expressed his anger with me and my actions. I am due to meet him again on this tomorrow, and in meditation this morning I was aware of a sense of hot, tight energy in my chest in anticipation of the meeting. This episode follows on from a series of events in which I have developed the view that I have been undermined, excluded and unappreciated by him.

- - - - - - - -

Thank you for taking the time necessary to write it out - I can imagine it was difficult at times to get the words down.  I appreciate your patience and courage in doing this!

And yes, I think this is indeed a "profitable" scenario, fairly long-standing in nature and a recurring source of a lot of energy and reaction.  As you see it, 1 has undermined, excluded and not appreciated you - not a good situation, to be sure!  It may be difficult to appreciate all that goes into what he says and does in the interactions the two of you have, what his history is and so forth, but you certainly are witness to the result of that.

One of the distinctions made in this inquiry is what the other person says/does and what they don't say/do.  His erupting about the role others were playing, what he said to your supervisor, and others were of course examples of what he did say and do.  It sounds like there are several other instances of where you believe he has undermined and excluded you by what he said and did, no?

A question I have is: what is it that you DO want him to say or do, that he doesn't typically say or do?  You mentioned that you've developed the view that he doesn't appreciate you - is that perhaps the big issue here?

If not the showing of appreciation, is there another sort of thing you would like him to say or do.  Agree with you?  Stay calm when you talk?

Whatever it is, can you briefly name or describe what it is you want him to say/do that he typically doesn't, even the words or gestures he would use, such that your interactions would go much differently?

- - - - - - - -

Interesting couple of days since I last wrote - there have been two fairly intense meetings with the ‘1’ in question. 

It certainly was quite a difficult experience, writing about these difficulties with ‘1’ - partly shame for reacting in the way I do. There was a lot more awareness of this sort of reaction starting to bubble up in the first of these meetings, when some pretty contentious stuff was being discussed. I found myself trying to imagine that someone I get on well with was saying the words that ‘1’ was saying, and what my reaction would be then. And probably there would be much less adverse reaction. Of course, it would be great if his words were overtly friendly and supportive and in agreement with my point of view (!), but when I reflect on it, it’s not so much what I would like him to say that I would like to change, but rather how I respond. Is it the arising of a self protective “I” that is behind this reaction when I feel I am being undermined or criticised? I suspect there is some truth in my impression that he resents me and dislikes some of my views, and I can understand that, but on top of that I suspect I am building more of a story than is actually present

Anyway, I think I am over-analysing now. So, during the course of this meeting, I could see occasions when I was aware he was finding some of the material painful, but also felt there were times when I felt myself starting to react and tense up to what I saw as him attempting to dominate a conversation and devalue other (Ie - my) contributions. I must say that my own reactions were much less, and I felt much calmer, than I might have previously - perhaps because this exchange is taking place.

I’ll return to your original question I think - is there anything I would like him to say or do differently? Well, it would be great (or to put it another way - I think my own response would be so much more positive) if he occasionally smiled when I made a suggestion or comment, rather than assume a disapproving expression; that he sometimes expressed some support or agreement with some aspect of the comment, rather than invariably (is my view) finding a negative response to make.

- - - - - - - -

Wow, for better or for worse, a very timely set of experiences.  I'm sorry it was at times such a painful meeting, but also glad you were able to get through it and make some quite valuable observations.  

It's good that you're open to there being what was happening as well as whatever story you were building on top of that.  I think that's a key here, even though it is likely very difficult to sort those two things out in the moment.  And I don't doubt that, as a result of the looking you've already been doing, some of your reactions were milder :-)

And thank you for homing in on what you would like to see/hear from him.  As I hear you, you'd like him to smile and express support, rather than scowl and express disapproval. All fair enough, to be sure, and no doubt would change the nature of a jillion conversations people have every day!

It may be easy to focus on what you don't like, the scowling and the disapproval, since it probably presses a few buttons and starts up a few reactions.  However, let's focus on what you DO want to see and hear but don't: a smile and expression of support.  It's something that anyone in the room could likely pick up on: perhaps a warm smile and "yes, I agree with that, that's a good point" or some such.  As you say, it seems he invariably doesn't respond in this way, which may be overstating it but, in any event, things start to get difficult when he doesn't smile and express support.  

As you sit and read this email, try saying the words "he doesn't smile and express support" (or whatever succinctly summarizes it for you) a few times, aloud or in your mind.  What happens first as a response: is it thoughts, bodily sensations, tightness, etc.?   Maybe try it a few times, taking a few breaths in between to clear the decks as it were so you can get a sense of what sorts of reactions first rise up.  Before any significant stories, anxiety and or anything else has a chance to gather steam, what are the first reactions when you bring that unpleasant fact to mind?

And as you bring up "he doesn't smile and express support" each time, what does that initial process of reaction seem to be, at least in symbolic terms.  Does it feel like your "1" button gets pushed, a hard-wired programme starts to run, a trigger gets squeezed, etc.?  While none of these would of course show up on an x-ray, is there some descriptor that resonates, where it's as if that process or mechanism arises as what is behind the reactions that start to arise?  
 
You're doing great in this, by the way :-)  I look forward to hearing about what you find!

- - - - - - - -

So, I'll go straight into that 'first response' exercise. If I sit and bring up, or replay a situation where that characteristic (as it seems to me) response occurs, I feel what is either a tight knot or a leaden heaviness forming in the pit of my stomach, behind the solar plexus. Then there is a 'here we go again' sense, followed by the draining away of energy and enthusiasm. This is more common than a hot sense of anger, though that has happened on occasion.

I don't know about 'button being pressed' or 'trigger squeezed', but there is a sense of habitual reaction to a familiar situation. When discussion around certain areas is going on, there will be a build up of anticipation that I am going to hear the familiar message, and a bit of anticipatory dread and the start of my reaction even before anything has been spoken or conveyed. I guess a bit like a programme has been activated that governs my reaction, and a sense of despondency that goes with it

I'll just post this now rather than try to analyse it any more - keep the flow going

- - - - - - - -

OK, this is great - very clear and direct, so thank you :-)

So, when 1 doesn't smile and express support, it's as if a programme activates, which leads to all sorts of responses and reactions.  Whilst some may take that as a cue to get angry, it sounds like your responses are usually to pull back: the draining of energy and enthusiasm, despondency, dread and a heaviness or knot in the stomach.
As you say, there is a sense of habitual reaction to this familiar situation: if 1 doesn't smile or express support, the programme attuned to that starts running again.

OK – let’s do some looking :-)  Please read this through before sitting down so you have the gist of it.

Find a quiet place, take a comfortable seat, close your eyes, and relax a bit. Then, bring the thought “1 doesn't smile or express support” to mind to get the sense of it, maybe let the thoughts and stories start up just a little bit around a typical scenario: allow it to be current but not overwhelming. Hold in your experience “1 doesn't smile or express support” that goes against what you want. Yes, that
issue :-)

Then, patiently but persistently, search within what is simply happening in experience for the programme that activates. It's the reason you have reacted in the past, why even now you are probably reacting a fair bit. The reactive responses predictably start up, so while it won't show up on an x-ray, what seems like a programme must be in there somewhere, no?

Please look for the programme itself, the thing itself, the reason any reactions start up. Rather than it being a cognitive or abstract exercise, and try to pinpoint exactly where it is and what it is. It’s not words or images associated with the issue: if those come up, you haven't found the programme, but only the reactions coming from it being activated.

Try to let "1 doesn't smile or express support" be the only thing happening here.  If the thoughts, emotions, stories, feelings, etc., do start to come up, that's OK - just know that you are looking underneath them to what is causing them. Back off a little if the reactions start to drag you away, if staying with the basic sense experience (the initial thought and physical sensations) is difficult.

Maybe run “1 doesn't smile or express support” through your mind a few times, and search for the reason why you have to respond in any certain way, why that statement means something in particular to you.  It may feel like mild torture, or may seem like you want to scream “but... but… 1 doesn't smile or express support!!”.

Just keep coming back to this basic fact: 1 doesn't smile or express support. Why react? Where is that programme within what is simply happening in experience?

Search for as long as you can, or as long as it takes, maybe taking a break. Maybe come back to it tomorrow.

Looking deeply and patiently, what do you find?

- - - - - - - -

I tried the exercise you suggested - not at an ideal time, a bit rushed and chores on my mind, and it didn't seem very productive. However, as luck would have it (!), another incident occurred which added fuel to the fire and provided a rich experience to work with

The story line is that I became aware of an email written by 1. The initial response was curiosity that 1 should have written an email to this particular person, but within that curiosity was already, I sense, the stirrings of a preparedness to be annoyed. As I read the email and took in the sense of it the reaction came. It was like a hot little volcano in my epigastrium from which emerged all the responses - "he shouldn't have ..."; "he had no right to...."; " he's trying to exert control again"; "he's undermining ....". 

At the moment there is no sight of the route between taking in the information, and the emergence of this hot volcano of anger and the angry mental responses. It just seems to be there, emerging as the sense of the information sinks in

That's it for now. I thought I would pass that on while it is fresh, but I will continue to sit with this and the original koan to see if a clearer sense of the process emerges

- - - - - - - -

Of course, a sad corollary of this, as the heat subsides, is that this aversion reaction has overtaken any sense whatsoever of compassion for this guy in what, from his point of view, is a very hard and painful situation

So it's lose/lose all round really, on the back of this aversive reaction

- - - - - - - -

Glad you had a chance to watch the reactive process unfold, and how automatic it seems to happen.  And yes, an opportunity lost for a compassionate response - a suggestion though is not get down on yourself too much on that: perhaps notice that the aspiration is there by virtue of looking at all this.

It sounds like the challenge is to read the email and just stay with the bare fact that "he's not expressing support for me".  One possible way in is to say to yourself: "OK, he's not expressing support for me: so what??"  This is not to dismiss it, but to really ask yourself why it's such a big deal. Where is the reason for that?  Simply asking "so what?" can be an effective perspective changer.

And not to be glib, but my guess is that I would read the email and have a different reaction, if any at all.  So, what is it about you that is reacting to the email?  Where is the mechanism that allows the volcano to start to erupt and flow?

- - - - - - - -

Thanks, some good avenues here

The first could be, as you say, to look at the flip side. More practise of metta and karuna bhavana would quite likely, without helping reveal in any way why aversion is arising, make more likely that a compassionate response will also appear to some degree

And yes, it’s highly likely that you would read the email and not respond as I did. It looks as if there needed to be four factors present for that reaction - the email itself; the history of the situation and previous communications; the history of my relationship with 1 and the pattern of response that has developed (you will have access to neither of the last two); and then, of course, the mystery factor - the underlying reason or mechanism for aversive response in the first place

With that little bit of clarity about the elements present, perhaps reflecting on that last situation, and also some situations which arose de novo, without a history behind then, might reveal something about the basic process. I haven’t had much chance to do that yet. I have tried (but rather briefly) reflecting on the phone call with the bank and my response to my friend, but they feel rather different to this ongoing situation with 1 (which, incidentally, seems to have lost most of its heat now, what with my own reflections and your suggestions). There does seem to be just a hint, a tantalising glimpse of what is behind these responses, but not yet coming into view. I will continue reflecting on these incidents and posing the question and see if more clarity appears

Thanks again - the work continues!

- - - - - - - -

Further reflection ......... and a sense of, or at least an image of, something like a crab lurking in a crevasse in the sea of ‘my’ mental processes, antennae out and sensing all that passes. When something attractive is detected it is out there dragging it in, and when something unattractive or threatening it will be out there nipping and biting and stimulating all sorts of reactions. So it seems very closely allied to vedana, occurring at that early response, once some identification has occurred. It appears to learn, so the first sniff of something experienced before, and either liked or not, will start to kick off the relevant response before the substance has been fully evaluated. So it is just a process going on in mind virtually unconscious until the effects manifest, and virtually uncontrolled. But of course, just a process operating

Will see if that becomes clearer with more attention and awareness

- - - - - - - -

The crab is a good image - I'll have to remember that one! :-)  And yes, that even an initial recognition of what might be out there can be enough to get the reaction process going - that's a good thing to notice.

For what it's worth, asking "So What?" was not intended to look at the flip side necessarily, but perhaps a more pointed way of asking why it is there seems to be any sort of reaction needed here: it can beg the question "what's behind all this?". That there has been a tantalising glimpse of what it behind these reactions is great.

There is certainly a lot that has gone into how you react to 1, or the other situations mentioned.  Taking that as a given, rather than focusing on what those influencing experiences have been, see if there's anything to which they could possibly contribute.  Where is the programme that is apparently interpreting past experiences and making reactions necessary?  This can help bring the focus away from thoughts and memories and back to the Gap.

- - - - - - - -

So the latest phenomenon to be observed is the "wizard of oz"! Bringing just enough of a situation to memory to get a feel of this aversion reaction starting to kick in, the crab just starting to get agitated, and trying to get a sense of what it is that it's protecting. And there seems to be nothing. There's nothing there - there just appears to be a reaction that kicks in given certain circumstances, but without anything substantial behind it

What's that all about?!

So given the right circumstances, there is awareness of this process arising - the tightness and tension, the narrowing and hardening of view, the discomfort, the pain that's present with this, the heat - but no source for this - so far, anyway

Interestingly, I have had some physical pain today, fairly minor, but that seems much more neutral. It's just there without a lot of aversive reaction. Maybe not severe enough to prompt that.

I'm not sure if this is what you were suggesting in your last email, but that's where things seem to have gone today anyway

- - - - - - - -

You've found the "spot" I think - staying on the cusp of the reactions starting up: strong enough to really notice them looming, but not too strong such that you fly off into reactions and/or can't inquire as to what might (not) be behind them.  If there is the "feel" of aversion - does it feel as if you should be doing/saying something?

And as you've seen so far, there's actually nothing behind it all. Sure, the initial mental and physical responses arise, but do you really have to act on those, go any further with them?  Is there really something like a programme that runs, that leads to the whole reactive process?

As you say: what's that all about??  You tell me: if it SEEMS like you should be thinking/doing/saying something in response to a difficult issue, yet you see that there's really nothing behind that urge, do you really have to react?

Try staying at that cusp, bringing to mind the situation to the point the unpleasant mental and physical sensations are definitely there, such that it seems like you should jump into all the reactions.  Look deep and long: can you find anything at all like a programme or something else, any reason you have to react?

- - - - - - - -

Yes, it does feel to be a fruitful area for further reflection. It does seem possible to hold attention on the arising of the reaction, and certainly to be aware that there does appear to be an imperative to act on it, that something needs to be done or said, or even just thought. Having said that - the latest development would appear to be that if the reaction is spotted, and the lack of need to respond also spotted, the optional response seems to want to kick in, the "near friend" of aversion, I suppose, of indifference. It's a 'well, what the f...." sort of impulse. 

It also struck me quite strongly that this is what Metta is all about. Not sure if it's by cultivation or by developing deeper awareness, but if a state arises where these potentially aversion producing situations result in a sense of Metta, that would be a very valuable state of affairs. It brings to mind some advice about a way to engage with Metta Bhavana which seems relevant here, to let awareness arise of our current state, the physical sense of it, then drop the question in - "what does your heart really desire". I can see that when this painful aversive reaction is arising that what is desired is the opposite, a warm accepting response.

- - - - - - - -

Glad that makes sense in experience - interesting that the opposite of indifference can kick in, another reaction.  Has that reaction occurred with any frequency over the years, or is that new because of how you are inquiring into things here?

In any event, consider that it doesn't actually change the inquiry: whether it is the volcano or subsequent indifference, the "goal" is to not actually go there, but stay with what you don't like and the urge to be doing/saying/thinking something because of that fact.

That sounds like a good metta exercise - for sure it would be great if the responses that 1 or anyone else gives you were motivated purely by metta, to really know and feel that.  Here, a suggestion is to stay with what you can actually see and hear, in that judging the extent to which his responses are or aren't motivated by metta requires at least some mind-reading and/or interpretation (i.e., who knows what's actually going through his mind, if you are over-reacting, etc.).

So, try to stay at that cusp, where both the sensations and the tug towards reactivity are unmistakable, and really look.  If thoughts or reflections come up, acknowledge them and look behind them - even they are in reaction to what is happening.

Just to be curious - is there any sense that thoughts and reflections, and/or thinking things over, is a way of distracting yourself to some extent?

- - - - - - - -

Right, back to the cusp! And yes, very easily distracted by reflecting and analysing!

- - - - - - - -

Well, it's been a full-on few days since my last email.  However, a couple of things seem to emerge. The first is that the flames of aversion appear to be burning less fiercely. I sat through a training session with a person I’ve had a “long history” with, with whom irritation is generally a feature, but was hardly present today.

The second, in a brief moment for reflection, was a sense of increased simplicity. In one way this was that there was less business of mind, with aversion being less active. In another way it felt a bit 'simple minded', with less complexity in thought.

- - - - - - - -

This sounds good!  Please notice, especially in typical situations (not sure if you are meeting with 1 again in the next few days...) how that goes. 

- Are you anticipating conflict, frustration, etc.? 

- If reactions do start up, how intense do they get? 

- Do they slam you right away, or is it more of a gradual onset? 

- Do they linger and nag, or do they dissolve away more quickly?

Also, please work with the 'procedure' for strong and even not-so-strong reactions, looking for what is behind it.  

I'd also be curious to hear more about the simplicity of mind, with less busy-ness.  What sorts of thought patterns drop away, and also what sorts of patterns remain?  

- - - - - - - -

Another little observation today - some opportunities for annoyance and anger, but in fact it seemed difficult to contact the bodily experience arising. Bringing a situation to mind didn’t bring any corresponding response, but more as if the mind was avoiding it rather than that the response has dissolved. I will pay attention to it over the weekend

- - - - - - - -

That's a very interesting observation that the bodily sensations didn't arise.  Can you expand a bit on what you mean by the mind avoiding it?  And was it a conscious or unconscious avoidance?

- - - - - - - -

My sense at the moment is that there is an unconscious slithering away from engaging with those mental states and physical accompaniments. If I attempt to ‘will’ an engagement in a moment the mind has slipped off to something else

- - - - - - - -

Thanks for the clarification.  It seems that in itself is a reaction - if you can stay with the attempt to engage with some issue, do you get a sense of why the mind wants to slither off?  Perhaps put another way, what are you hoping for that isn't happening?  

- - - - - - - -

Ok, so here we are again. Bit perplexed, as there is a lot going on in life at the moment.  What does anxiety feel like? It's a bit like anger, I guess, but without the heat. There is the tightness, the knot in the abdomen, and a similar lack of clarity about what it's all about, what is underlying it. Anyway, that started to settle as the day drew on.  

At work today, I noticed that suddenly my heart was full of such warmth for everyone there, my 'difficult' people included with no effort. And again when trying to contact that feeling of aversion, there was nothing there. But this time it did not feel like it was being avoided, just that there was nothing there to contact. So on this occasion there was no attempt to slither off, there was no problem about bringing to mind the issues, just no painful reaction associated with them, no sense of wanting something else, it was just fine as it was. 

- - - - - - - -

Now another day on: in meditation this morning - again quite positive states of mind. If a contentious situation came to mind it was just noted and dropped very easily. At work, the day passed well, though with some background anxiety now and again. A couple of situations occurred that could have provoked a reaction, but in fact didn't. Meditating after work, a quite simple situation came to mind, and very quickly it developed into a proliferation of thoughts with the signs of anger starting to boil up. In part it was based on memory of a previous situation that had gone badly (by my reckoning), and partly on a totally imaginary prediction of what would happen this time. This was 'seen' reasonably quickly, but it was a shock how suddenly it showed up. Again it was like a programme had been set running. 

So in this case it was an anticipated conflict, with the signs starting to build up quite rapidly, but when they were noted they dropped away promptly. It's easy to see the overt trigger, but there is definitely a sense of a more subtle trigger behind that, but it has not come into focus. Clearly some sense of "self" is being challenged, and clearly there is no substance to this, all there is is memory and proliferation or speculation. But still it fires off. At least there is no 'slithering off' now, and I can stay with the sensation.

- - - - - - - -

So, in those many opportunities for craving and aversion to really get going, staying with what was(n't) behind it all caused it all to quickly deflate.  Stuff will still come up, even with a fair bit of energy - expectation management is helpful here.  But if it's clear there's nothing actually behind the reactions ramping up, their support falls away and it all evaporates (until the next time...).  

And yes, there is still a strong sense of "self" being challenged here, because you are still identifying with experience.  It's certainly more subtle than the grosser version of "selfing" you saw through before, but quite tangible nonetheless.  For better or for worse, we're quite talented in this way :-)

So, as you continue to notice reactions start up and look behind them, you tell me: is there anything called desire and ill will, or whatever you would call what's behind self-referent reactions, the reason(s) those reactions start up?  Has there ever been?

- - - - - - - -

It's been quite busy over the last week or so, hence the delays with replies. However, I have been reflecting both on and off the cushion over the matters at hand. I've been looking for the rider of this horse that starts galloping away when the conditions leading to anger/ aversion occur. It's continuing to get clearer that when those conditions arise, this triggers the physical symptoms - the tightness, heat, etc, and a particular script of mental dialogue, depending on the situation. It's not clear how, where or when this script gets laid down, just that it starts running in these circumstances. Sometimes related to a particular individual, sometimes to a particular type of situation. There is still no sign of any 'imp' or ego that is there getting offended and kicking this off, or riding the horse! In fact, what seems to be happening now is that when a potentially aversion producing situation occurs, the physical symptoms do not appear to be happening, or at least very mildly. The script starts up, but it seems very obvious, and the absence of anything behind it seems very obvious, so, as you say, it just deflates and evaporates.

So no, there is nothing specific to be called 'ill will', and no apparent entity being offended that is behind the reaction. The how, why, where and when of these responses being laid down remains a mystery, of course.

This has mostly been around ill will so far. It's that which has been most apparent in my experience, and has been the cause of most suffering, and is the most obvious in terms of working with it. Desire has seemed more subtle, but I fear that doesn't mean it isn't as strong, and I sense that I need to engage with that as well now

I have to say this may be a bit of a honeymoon, in that perhaps the 'aversion trigger' hasn't been strongly tested over the last couple of weeks, but time will tell

- - - - - - - -

Thanks for the update :-)   Yes, how it all happens, the scripts and the other reactions, and the how, why, where and when it was laid down, is difficult to say.  Of course, the same could be said for the "self" - trying to sort out something that doesn't actually exist can be pretty hard!

Ill will being the strongest is probably the most common - good idea to also be on the lookout for desire too.

So yes, see how the trigger situations go, and keep looking behind any reactions that arise.  That you are seeing how reactions just start to deflate and evaporate is super :-)

Also, another suggestion is to notice what it feels like when you DON'T say/do what you have the urge to say or do.  There may be some secondary reactions to not instantly reacting.

For example, if you're with 1, and you don't defend yourself, acquiesce, etc. as it seems you should, is there a bit of vertigo or disorientation there?  Does the script something like "Oh no, I'm not XXXing like I normally do, so something is going wrong here..." start to run?  Does it feel like you're working without a net?

So, what are the sensations and initial thoughts when typical urges to react aren't responded to?

- - - - - - - -

It’s very interesting - and I’m not at all sure what is going on! I can’t quite believe that any dramatic change can have taken place, and I certainly haven’t been aware of any ‘big bang’ type experience, but still - things have changed. A lot seems to have dropped away. I have great difficulty in bringing to mind episodes or situations that generate anger or aversion. Well, I can bring a situation to mind, but there isn’t any heat with it, it just seems very ordinary without any additional weight. The usual culprits just aren’t stimulating the tension and story that previously came up. The general experience of other people feels positive and open, and in fact the whole of my experience feels more open and more free. And also, it seems, much clearer. There have been some contacts in conditions that could have caused a reaction, but they haven’t

It seems very premature to say that there has been a fundamental change, and I’m sure I have not been seriously tested so far, so I wait and see from that point of view, but it feels positive and encouraging. 

So the process when an interaction occurs without a response seems to be “Oh okay, that's fine then” It just seems quite loose and open. There isn’t any obvious sense of lack or anything missing, just “so that’s how it is ... fine”

There does not appear to be an urge to find an instigator either any more

The thought does arise now and then that perhaps the delving has stopped a bit prematurely, perhaps before enough has been unearthed. I don’t know. At present it feels fine to just be with each situation as they arise, and be aware of the response. But I would welcome your advice on this - how to proceed? Push harder or await emergence?!!

- - - - - - - -

This was a very good email to read :-) :-) :-)

This completely tracks with what I and others have experienced.  No big "Wow!" moment necessarily (although that does happen), perhaps just a blink, but what is noticeable is what's missing - most of the reactions.  Watching the usual suspects arise and depart without much fanfare becomes par for the course, although major eruptions may still occur. 

It typically takes a while to believe this, so no worries there.  And yet, as you're finding out, there has been a change in beliefs, that to a significant extent you no longer assume there is something behind potential reactions that makes the reactions necessary.  The "proof" that something has changed comes at you several times a day - you just don't react like you used to.  A lot of habits have to be worked through, though: the buttons have to be pushed several more times before you are completely convinced there's no circuitry associated with them.  

So, my suggestion is to let it settle, and see how it goes.  If there are expectations that ALL the reactivity should have disappeared, they didn't :-)  And yet, the standard teaching of the reactions being slower to start, milder in intensity and quicker to dissipate can be watched and seen as true.  

Further delving at this point may be futile, as things likely need to settle before there is something substantial to delve into.  It took several weeks for me to start to see something tangible to work with again.  What the heck - enjoy the ride for a while :-)  The suggestion is to just keep observing how reactions do or don't arise - it may even be a fun little game to play, and fascinating to watch how situations that used to be unbearable are mild irritations now.  

And as I think I hear you say, it's not a matter of being disinterested or withdrawn from the lives of others - anything but.  There is now much less standing in the way of the altruistic responses that naturally arise but have been blocked or distorted by "I want this and don't want that".  You can more easily just respond, rather than think about it and talk yourself into saying or doing something more selfish.

Well done!!

--

Desire and Ill Will - Sample Dialogue 2

​Thank you for that great introduction to what is going on in your life!  A recurring theme I hear is to "push away" that which you don't like - I would like to explore that a little more. You listed many instances where that seems to come up: your friends, your Mum, etc.

If your relationship with your Mum is where reactions take over now and again, and is someone who is in your life regularly, I suggest we explore that. What does she typically say or do that says "demanding, manipulative, condescending" to you? What sorts of interactions give rise to the reactions which you later on have to let go of?

- - - - - - - -

Her conditioning is a strict middle class background. She acts like a Victorian matriarch.

If I haven't seen her in a couple of weeks she'll say "I used to see my mother weekly", "you like your friends more than us", "I didn't bring you up to be... (Replace dots with whatever is in her mind)"

She doesn't get that I work and have friends, so if I have a gap at work I might say "why not come over Friday morning for a coffee then" and she'll say "oh no that's when we do our food shopping".

So you get the picture, bless her, she’s old fashioned, stuck in her ways, hasn't realised the world and society has moved on.

As to what sorts of interactions give rise to the reactions which you later on let go of, it’s the sort of thing above. All of them I let go of really. Just not quickly enough.

I know she’s just a being who is suffering cos she doesn't know the truth, she doesn't even want to let go of the old fashioned values she holds to even make the mundane easier. I love her. She just frustrates me :-) .

When I'm in full flow I have the clarity and wisdom to handle her, when I'm not I get frustrated and let it go later. I just wanna stay with the ability to not to bite in the first place.

- - - - - - - -

Sorry your Mum is in a rather stuck place.  I can imagine how difficult it must be to take in what she says and does, especially if you aren't in the right mental space to watch your own reactions and/or otherwise let it all slide past.

What I would like you to do is briefly list some typical thoughts, stories, emotions, sensations, etc. that arise when you have these sorts of difficult interactions with your Mum.  It may be helpful to identify where the reactions are centered, using statements like "I think, I feel, my body reacts by" etc.  If feelings of guilt or other reactions over responding this way arise, that's OK, but try to stay with what are the direct results of such encounters.  I hope this doesn't feel like prying - the intent is to get some clarity on what exactly happens for/with you when she says or does the things she does.  This could be going on memory, or perhaps running a couple of the above scenarios around your mind a bit to get the juices flowing a bit :-)

- - - - - - - -

I thought I'd check out the 'Mum stuff' this afternoon, but then something happened, which might give a truer picture of the selfing patterns than trying to work from longer memory...

I was talking to a friend who I’ve talked about seeing through the illusion of the self to.  They seemed to think my experience was artificially happy. That I wasn't really engaging with vedana and sensations (what was happening in experience until that point was just happiness, what can I say?!)  Then a whole load of selfing kicked in around a desire to be understood & to be liked, it felt like heart pain around my friend not "getting me" then irritation about why do I have to change what I say to suit them?  This came with a gut / belly whoosh upwards. Feeling alone, not understood. Then poor-me'ing thoughts that I'm a failure... knowing that my life is my practice but I'm never good enough... That was the story I think.

An old one that comes from dealings with my Dad actually. Oh golly...now this moment... Crying is happening, typing is happening. Sighing is happening. Tears stopped... Yum yuk, smile, sigh!! :-/

On one hand I know it’s all irrelevant storytelling on the other in this moment, in the next it can feel so real and therefore painful!

- - - - - - - -

Thanks for this - sorry you had such a tough day :-(   For better or for worse, something this raw and fresh, and likely not the first occurrence, might be a good point of departure.  While the old "self" is long gone, this is all the exquisite crap that went into it, is so strong that it once felt that there HAD to be a self who owned it.

It seems very clear from your description what you didn't like about your meeting with your friend, and also what you would have wanted that would have made it go much differently.   Might it boil down to "she's not getting me"?  There's certainly a lot of details involved, but if there was one thing you wanted from her (and maybe your Mum and Dad too?) that wasn't the case, it's that she's doesn't get you?  They don't get you?  Is that a good gut-level summary of what you're looking for in these sorts of situations?  If not, how would you summarize it in 6 words or less??

- - - - - - - -

I would say that yes "she/they don't get me" or "she doesn't understand me" is the phrase.

Underlying it is of course the view that if they don't understand me they won't love/like 'me'.

I also saw a pattern around the slightly neurotic storytelling that happened afterwards, the tizz I got into, making mountains out of mole hills.  She said I don't always seem at ease with myself, and I said that's because I find watching myself selfing so painful.

Anyway, so whilst at one level I feel a bit of a twerp, I see a pattern of behaviour and a desire to break it! :-)

- - - - - - - -

So, whether it was this last situation, or perhaps with your Mum etc., when you initially become aware "they don't get me", what is it that seems to happen somewhere inside?  Before the thoughts, the physical sensations, the stories, the image, the emotions: what feels like is leading to all that?  It may feel like there is a button getting pushed, a program that runs, a trigger that gets pulled.  How would you describe it?

That's not to say that it would show up on an x-ray, but what sort of process or thing gets activated when you first realize that people aren't getting you?  It's as if you walk into a situation with that "thing" somewhere, ready to activate or run, and as soon as you become aware of people not getting you, it trips and away you go :-)

So, how would you complete the sentence "When I see/hear that people don't get me, it's as if...".  Maybe gently bring up the situation with your friend just to get a feel of what seems to initially happen.

- - - - - - - -

This is quite difficult!..... But I think... a well worn groove in my brain triggers a surge of pure panic and pain starts in my core heart / gut... Or maybe it's the other way round!?

I do know there is unpleasant vedana then an emotional response. I'm just not sure whether thoughts or body stuff releases first!?

I'm with Mum tomorrow, so I will see if any irritation arises, and see if there are minor effects I can spot.

- - - - - - - -

Glad you were able to identify the sense that there is a well-worn groove in the brain that leads to everything starting up.  Be very curious how it is with your Mum, and if that same sense of a well-worn groove resonates if/when she says or does something that strikes you negatively.

The intent is to get a sense of what initially happens, regardless of the situation (Mum, friend, etc.), such that the thoughts, physical sensations, etc. start up and in some cases more or less take over.
So, please let me know how it goes with your Mum.

- - - - - - - -

Well with my Mum generally there is less anxiety, it's just "oh here she goes again"...

True to form she had a couple of negative outbursts ... But was on reasonably good behaviour ;-).

So I noted to myself "oh dear", discomfort in my diaphragm, like it ceased up in defence! Then there was a slightly rising "ire" in my sternum / throat. But I didn't react... Well not externally.

I will watch out for my response in other situations tomorrow.

- - - - - - - -

Thanks for the report about the visit with your Mum.  I suggest we look deeper into this, as it is a life-long relationship that continues to have an impact.  As you've put it, when your Mum doesn't get you, it's as if a well-worn pattern of neurons fire.

OK – let’s do some looking :-) Please read this through before sitting down so you have the gist of it.

Find a quiet place, take a comfortable seat, close your eyes, and relax a bit. Then, bring the thought “she doesn't get me” to mind to get the sense of it, maybe let the thoughts and stories start up just a little bit around a typical scenario: allow it to be current but not overwhelming. Hold in your experience “she doesn't get me” that goes against what you want.  Yes, that issue :-)

Then, patiently but persistently, search within what is simply happening in experience for the well-worn pattern of neurons that fires that seems like it's in there somewhere. That's the ‘thing’ that starts up when you notice her (or anyone else) not getting you, the reason you have reacted in the past, why even now you are probably reacting a fair bit. Given the circumstances, that she doesn't get you, why are your reactions necessary? The reactive responses predictably start up, so what seems like a well-worn pattern of neurons must be in there somewhere.

Please look for the pattern of neurons itself, the thing itself, rather than it being a cognitive or abstract exercise, and try to pinpoint exactly where it is and what it is. It’s not words or images associated with the issue: if those come up, you haven't found the well-worn pattern of neurons, but only the reactions coming from it being fired.

If the thoughts, emotions, feelings, bodily reactions, etc., do start to come up, that's OK - just know that you are going underneath them to what is causing them, past the stories, emotions and words. The only thing happening here is that she doesn't get you: everything else is in response to that.

Back off a little if the stories and emotions make it difficult to see past them, if staying with the basic sense experience (the initial thought and the associated physical raw sensations) is difficult.

Don't just cognitively dismiss there actually being a well-worn pattern of neurons – it certainly seems like there is one in there somewhere, no?

Maybe run “she doesn't get me” through your mind a few times, and search for why it is you have to respond in any certain way, why that statement means something in particular to you. It may feel like mild torture, or may seem like you want to scream “but... but… she doesn't get me!!”.

Just keep coming back to this basic fact: she doesn't get you. Why react? Where is that well-worn pattern of neurons within what is simply happening in experience?

Search for as long as you can, or as long as it takes, maybe taking a break. Maybe come back to it tomorrow.

Looking deeply and patiently, what do you find?

- - - - - - - -

I’m not sure my Mum causes enough anxiety these days! However, I’ve sat with those thoughts as suggested.  AND I have also run some other scenarios around an ex.  

All I notice is a tension arising in my diaphragm area, and also a tension in my head at the back, just above the occiput.  Then the stories arise.

I notice mild arising selfing anxiety as I type ... “have I noticed what she wanted? have I understood? etc etc” and that triggers the same areas, tension in my diaphragm and possibly in the back of my head! 

I will keep looking!

- - - - - - - -

Thanks for this, and the initiative to look in other issues as well :-)  

As you reflect on/review those situations, there are physical symptoms, then the stories kick in.  However, the well-worn pattern of neurons was not found, ya?  Was there anything that inherently connected what was actually happening (recalling this situation or that) and any subsequent reaction (physical sensations, then stories, etc.)?

A question I would like to check out with you: is there a part of you that is holding back on responding to these situations? From what you've said, these situations provoke strong responses, at least in the moment. Is it your way to measure your responses to people and situations?  For purposes of this inquiry, please allow yourself to fully respond, even if that is something you tend to abstain from: we're looking for the way to finally be done with it all, not just set it aside or tamp it down.

Perhaps try this with the issues around your father, about which tears welled up the other day   Running "he didn't get me" or another thing he failed to say or do may be more useful.  Looking back, what did you want him to say or do that wasn't the case?  Let it all out - let it trigger whatever it might trigger.  Intoning that phrase, where is the well-worn pattern of neurons that dictate how you could or should respond to him, even going on memory?

- - - - - - - -

I’m not sure what I’m looking for? re ‘well-worn pattern of neurons’.  

I mean, as stated already,  I found an area in the rear of my head that tensed – if you are looking for a physical part of the brain, and there might also be a ping behind my left brow with the unpleasant vedana ...and yet I doubt that is what you mean... and yet you say I’m looking for something before the physical symptoms kick in? 

yours@confused.com

- - - - - - - -

Sorry this is not quite clear yet - you're not the first to report this :-)  

The inquiry is to look into what happens when potentially upsetting experiences arise.   There is the initial experience (what someone says or does), and then there is your reaction to it.  Ideally, it would all be water off a duck's back :-)  However, for those sorts of situations where you have strong responses, the intent is to take in what is happening (what they are saying or doing), and see if you can find anything within what is simply happening in experience that dictates or even influences how you should respond.  

Using a handle like a 'well-worn pattern of neurons' as you referred to it can make it a more tangible inquiry.  Or, if it suits you, as it did me, I just looked for the 'reason' why I should be responding in any particular way to the situation.  In any event, the inquiry is about looking within what is simply happening in experience for the 'thing' that is dictating your response.  It's not a thing that will show up on an x-ray, but it nevertheless seems like there is something that takes your basic experience (what others say and do) and leads you towards craving and aversion, longing and anger, etc.  Attached is a summary of where we've been and some other observations about it, which may be helpful.

You've described a difficult experience with a friend, and also the tears that came up when recalling what your past relationship with your Dad was like.   It's just words in an interview, memories that come and go: why do you react to them?  Don't dismiss those responses or say "I'm over it now" - will similar experiences not arise again?  Let the issue be alive for this inquiry.

When someone doesn't get you, where is the reason, the well-worn pattern of neurons, or whatever you might call it, that dictates your response?  Keep the experience of what they say and/or do in mind to keep the issue alive, but instead of going on to the reactions (physical sensations, stories, etc.), stay right with "they don't get me" and look within what is simply happening in experience for why it is you are reacting.

Another suggestion is to be more exact about what it is that they are not doing or saying.  In the case of the friend, you may have wanted her to say "I understand" but she didn't.  So, when she doesn't/didn't say "I understand", that's what triggers the well-worn pattern of neurons.  This is more exact than "she doesn't get me", which is more of a summary and inference than what she did or didn't say.   

So, the suggestion is to use "She/He didn't/doesn't say..." when working with her or your Dad's past statements that still hurt, etc.

- - - - - - - -

I have found a lot of resistance over the last 2 or 3 days to emotionally engaging with any of the scenarios!  Some resistance has been thoughts of “what do you want to do a ‘poor me’ for?” and other times it has been a physical refusal to allow emotion to come – a resistance to tears – yet I am usually easily moved to tears. So it’s quite interesting to see the resistance.

Anyway, there is a view here that “I’m not good enough” (in my eyes and anyone else’s), that I have had so many opportunities and I have achieved an OK level at whatever, but not excelled - which I have probably had the ability to do – due to lack of confidence and self belief.  Therefore I have a view that in my eyes and everyone else’s that I’ve wasted my opportunities and therefore I’ve “failed”!...typical ‘me’ approach... let’s just take the extreme beat one’s self up mode, and go from perhaps ‘could have done better’ to ‘failed’ Smile  (rolls eyes at self!)

Ok so... thinking of my relationship with Dad... it didn’t matter how many exams I passed, how much I achieved... he always showed more love to my sister.  ... anyway the stories have also led to lots more feeling of failure and not being believed.   (Sorry, I don’t suppose you wanna hear this rubbish – but I’m not sure it will make sense otherwise)

To answer your suggestion below "She/He didn't/doesn't say..."  it would be  “S/he doesn’t say s/he loves me”.  I think wanting to be loved is all I want at the root of it all, that includes loving myself, because I don’t have enough.  Because the view above says “Why would they love me? I’ve failed/I’m not good enough”.

I’m not sure I’m there yet.   I will keep playing the scenarios through.

Any thoughts?

- - - - - - - -

Thanks for this - glad that you are able to identify the resistance.  And the history is important, so please don't worry about it being rubbish :-)

It sounds like "He didn't (doesn't) say he loves me" is the crux of it.  A lot of stories might get kicked up about why that is, what that says or confirms is about you, why he is/was justified or not, etc. - try to let the stories, associated images and so forth slide by or arise and fall, and stay with what the basic sensate experience is, the fact: he's not saying he loves you.  This is not to undervalue it: it's clearly important.  But that's what's happened, what's happening.  

You want(ed) him to say he loves you, and that's not the case: so what?  Where is the pattern of neurons that dictates how you have to or should respond to that?

You're doing great - this all sounds very good!  

- - - - - - - -

So is it possible there is anything below this apart from ego?

I'm still looking!

- - - - - - - -

Thanks for checking in :-)  Glad you are still with it.  

Can you clarify what you mean by "is there anything below this apart from ego?"?  

I wonder if you are using the old ego-based processes as a catch-all, whereby it might end up being a "thing" that is superimposed on this inquiry.  It's tough to tell, but you seem to be looking for an explanation, something that IS there, if only in an abstract sense.  

Instead, try to keep it to "is there anything below this?"

- - - - - - - -

I had my birthday on Saturday and didn’t want to look at painful things, especially as my Dad came down for the day and took me out and was lovely, and clearly does love me.  I could see that he’s just a silly human playing out his silly conditioning the same as the rest of us.  But since then I’ve been  procrastinating!  I aimed to set aside time to reflect upon all the situations...and then... resistance to looking has been getting in the way big time!  e.g. “I’m happy, why do I want to get upset?”, “It’s all just poor me-ing, you know it’s only a story” etc etc

And you were right I was using the ego as a catch-all.   I don’t think there is anything below wanting to be loved, by my Dad, or in any of the situations.  But I’m not sure if that’s true or just a conceptual belief because I’m holding out from the truth... so I do need to really sit and run them all through more.

I will go and do it right now!

Be back in a bit 

- - - - - - - -

I think the well-worn hardwired pattern is... just to tamp down anything I don’t want to hear, and bottle it away as pain in the diaphragm. Pain/Anger/craving.   I don’t want to feel it – so habitually I don’t, I just leave it there!  

I ran this through the scenarios, tried to sit with the sensations... in brief :

The ex > she used me/hurt me > ill will > I wasn’t good enough > tearful> physical tightness in diaphragm.

Mum > manipulation > irritated > she doesn’t want to understand me  > diaphragm

Dad > I’m a failure in his eyes> doesn’t love me as I am > diaphragm

Friend > confusion > I feel a freak for not doing feelings > she doesn’t understand me? > diaphragm

They all really boil down to “I’m not good enough, so they won’t love (like) me “... so I’ll push it all away under the diaphragm and ignore it, as I don’t do “feeling” things.

Today – trying to look beneath at this diaphragm tightness – I can’t find anything! ????

As I thought about the ex, felt the sensations in my diaphragm, it melted: currently there is kindly awareness to the fact I’ve beaten myself up for nothing.  Thinking of Mum & Dad led to compassion.  Thinking of my friend led to equanimity,  kindly awareness and mostly made me smile.

I’m not sure whether I’m still burying something... I don’t think I am...but I haven’t found it easy .  Tried to re-run this all again though, and its not currently causing the usual tearful reaction...whether this is all good now or because I’m in a good state at this moment...?

What do you think? What next?

- - - - - - - -

This sounds good :-)  In all four situations, you were able to reflect on what your various reactions have been, and currently still are.  I can imagine how difficult this work is, and I applaud your courage!

As with focusing on the diaphragm, the inquiry is underneath all of the reactions, including the stories, memories and so forth.  A suggestion is not to think in terms of burying something (you'll never find that 'thing' within what is simply happening in experience either); rather, what sort of well-worn pattern are you, out of habit, following the groove of?

The intent is to stay with the basic sensate experience of what they aren't saying that you want to hear.  A suggestion is to pick one, perhaps your Dad.  "He never said I Accept You" or whatever most succinctly captures what you most wanted to hear.  Intoning that, where is the pattern that dictates your response to that fact?  It's that pattern which apparently makes necessary all of the reactions: where is that pattern?  

If you start reacting (stories, painful memories, tightening in the diaphragm, etc.), back off a bit, or start over.  The goal is to stay with just "He never said..." and search for why that means anything in particular, for the pattern that makes the reactions seem inevitable. 

If you can stay with just that phrase, and feel the familiar tug of the incipient reactions but not fly away with them, you can look for the pattern. 

Where is the pattern?  Why react at all?  

- - - - - - - -

I’m happy to keep looking, but so far the underlying pattern to them all is just to want to be loved/liked? I wonder why this isn’t enough?

I feel hurt when about anything that doesn’t make the ‘me’ loved?  

Why react at all? Well I guess that’s because this sub-consciously shores up the sense that the ‘me’ really exists.

Because it isn’t how “I” want it to be... not in the perfect ‘me’ world... (laughs!!!)

Anyway maybe I’m still missing something. Will keep looking for a pattern.

- - - - - - - -

What you've found are words that come up that say "I want to be loved".  You're looking for the pattern or groove of neurons (as I think you called it) that necessarily leads to that conclusion, those words.  

By pattern I mean a thing, not a pattern in the sense of a thread they all have in common. If any words come up, or images, or memories: that ain't it :-)  You’re looking for the "thing" itself from which all of these reactions spring.  

It's as if there is a pattern of neurons, some machinery as it were, in there somewhere that takes "He didn't say..." and causes all the reactions: where is it?  Where is that collection of neurons, that machinery?  It's the reason all this pain comes about.

- - - - - - - -

Isn't it just habit...based on years of a false belief of a self? ...

I'll keep looking!

- - - - - - - -

That's one explanation... but where's the "habit"? You tend to posit things to explain what's happening: where are they within what is simply happening in experience???

- - - - - - - -

My initial response on reading your email was 'nothing' and laughter. Because earlier if I tried to relive any of the scenarios, once I'd seen they were just habit. That was all I was getting.

There is a growing image though that the vinyl record, the song of “me” has come to an end, but the needle hasn't lifted off the final groove... So it's going round and round because that's just what happens if it’s not seen to be finished... Just an empty habit.

But in my post-gate insomnia I thought, clearly I'm still missing something. Let's read that email again. On second reading at 3am, in a different space, its "I don't understand". 

So I examined this instead  ... I felt irritated > what is it I'm missing? > I don't understand > does that matter? Yes because there is fear of failure.

Logically, it strikes me that this could be a root groove, e.g. "I don't understand" why ... People don't get me/ want to manipulate me/ don't just love me etc.

If I'm still missing the point where in the "so I examined this again" paragraph should I stop to look for this "thing"?

- - - - - - - -

Try to stop prior to the irritation, the first reaction :-)  

You read those words in my email, and it sounds like your initial thought was "I don't understand".  Just stay there, with those words, and search for why you have to go on to irritation, the stories which unpack it (they don't get me, etc.) and the rest.  If any more words come up, just go back to "I don't understand", even if it seems like you should be screaming those three words at the top of your lungs.  

Mum.  Dad.  "I don't understand": so what?  Those words are all that is happening.  "I don't understand".  Where is the "groove", or whatever you want to call that which is apparently dictating your responses to that basic fact? 

This is like LU: you had believed all your life that there was a "me" in there somewhere.  There had to be.  And yet, in the end...   

Where is the reason for any of these reactions?  I used the somewhat more abstract "reason" as that which I was searching for.  It may help to just look for that, if it helps you avoid coming up with new metaphors and analogies like the "record groove" or "years of habit". 

- - - - - - - -

Today I noticed a turning inward, a contraction.  

(Once I spotted that, an image followed of wanting to curl up in a safe fetal type position. Shut it all out)

Still looking!  Trouble is it’s feeling stuff... habitually don’t notice feelings unless a brick lands on my head (Smile)

BTW the irritation was at my own stupidity and not understanding not at your email per se.

I actually thought it was good having the pithy short DP type response to shake up my brain!

- - - - - - - -

Perhaps a way to look at this is: the intent is to experience the incipient reactions, but not get carried away by them.  Perhaps there has been a habit of just avoiding the feelings and emotions altogether, and now you are hesitant to even "go there" for fear that things will quickly get icky?  

A suggestion is to bring the phrase to mind, and briefly recognize "yes, I can see where this can go...", but give yourself permission to NOT go that direction.  Heck, acknowledge just prior to bringing up the phrase that things will start to ramp up a bit.  Instead of following the reactions down the lane (which you do NOT have to do...), just feel the tug of incipient emotions and reactions, and turn back to the phrase, knowing that it's just those few words. The tug will likely remain, and that's the whole intent: notice the tug but don't follow it.  It's not all or nothing, or about shutting the responses out altogether, but rather accepting that they start to arise and would love to take you on a ride.  Stay In The Gap :-)

- - - - - - - -

So since Tuesday morning when I saw there was nothing behind my continued reaction to the old stories and laughed that it was just habit, there was some kind of heartfelt change and since then there has been a lot more equanimity around those stories, all old stories really.  Or maybe it’s just complacent contentment – I guess only time will tell!  

Even trying to get irritated with myself for “I don’t understand” has been difficult.  

Your emails today remind me that I need to stay with what is simply happening in experience and should NOT follow the story OR my analytical mind! (doh! ) They were very helpful. 

You’re probably right that there’s fear it might be ‘icky’ as you put it, ...or may that I will feel I need to run away, or curl up and pretend it’s not happening.  

This evening, I experienced the biggest unpleasant vedana for days – as a car decided to pull out and nearly drove into the side of mine - I had to swerve and brake hard, I felt revved up and I have to say I swore, but then the story dropped quickly.  Sadly, I didn’t manage to stay in the gap.

On return I’ve sat running “I don’t understand” over and over, and noted mild diaphragm tension in response to that - rising panic/fear of failure.

Then I’ve just read your email, about the FB doc you said I’d not seen the last 2 pages, which I took to suggest I should.  So I’ve just read them.  In a way I wish I hadn’t, as I feel I was almost there without the answer!  But it may have taken a while longer to work out what the “thing” was from my sense of “rising panic/felt revved up”,   - which suggest flight/fight/fright responses i.e. releases of adrenaline.  So now I know what the “thing” is to look for – I just have to work out how to recognise it as a ‘tug’ before I react.

Does adrenaline still appear in a craving situation? I still get diaphragm tightness which might be one of my first clues.  Well I suppose there must be seratonin or some other happy-hormone release.
- - - - - - - -

So... tell me more about Tuesday!  What do typical situations (Mum, Dad, etc.) now feel like?  It's been a couple days since then: what has the onset rate and strength been for the usual suspects, those recurring tensions, anxieties and dreads? Almost getting into an accident is a more acute example obviously: can you tell me more about what you thought/felt/did in the aftermath?

To clarify terms, the "thing" is desire somewhere in the gap, which the tug seems to be proof of.  Call it a pattern, a bunch of habits, or whatever.  Staying just with the tug (as opposed to the wild ride), and the mere words of "I don't understand this", what does the tug prove?  Sure, memories, sensations, stories, etc. will flare up: so what.  As you sit reading this, how do you respond to all of it?

- - - - - - - -

So Tuesday - Gosh it's a struggle post-LU to remember 24 hours ago! But I do remember that I was working through my scenarios. Like I said to you, I just had this image of the vinyl record, and that the song had stopped playing, but the needle was stuck in the 'run out groove' and occasionally something would jog the needle back on to the song, and that if I just chose to lift the needle off the record, the turntable would stop.  And I saw that this was appropriate to all the old stories, that really there was nothing there but just a habit of reacting the way I did and had a chuckle.  I can't get cross/irritated/worry about feeling loved or a failure or anything with any of these old scenarios.

But I'm not convinced I've yet stopped new stories - so yes I need still to look in the gap for this 'thing' - stay with the 'tug' as you put it.  The near car accident, left me feeling a bit shaky. But I had dropped the story 200 yards after the event.  I think I might be stopping the 'live' stories quicker but not yet getting them in the gap!

How do I respond to reading this email?  And 'I don't understand'. mmmm in an equanimous kind of fashion really... Neutral.

I keep trying to shout the words inwardly to myself, recreate the irritation and I notice a very mild tension in my diaphragm and then I just don't believe the irritation, so it immediately melts.

My Mum phoned and started to be bossy, I just let it wash over me. Again I noticed a mild tension in the diaphragm then it all melted, I let her talk on, doing her thing. But there wasn't too much stimulus here. I had a wry smile to myself.

If I try and think of something I might crave  - that also seems difficult, but the first thing I note is the diaphragm tense.  I know you consider the diaphragm is just a sensation and not the 'thing' but, it's all I'm noticing at the mo after the 'yum/yuk' of the vedana .

So you asked what does the 'tug' prove, well nothing - it's just habit. Even noting the diaphragm tense, I can see it's just habit - and leads to the physical feeling of pushing away. And in flow  - ie when the thoughts & selfing are very minimal - that diaphragm just relaxes, when of course everything is just hunky-dory as it is.   But what happens in the gap after contact/vedana and before the sensation of diaphragm tightness? ... the million dollar question!?????

Still looking!!

- - - - - - - -

This is sounding very good :-)  You don't always have much of an "aha" moment with fireworks and marching bands when things shift.  A significant memory like the phonograph needle (that dates us...) can be something to come back to: is there a word or phrase that can bring that experience up, to remind you?  

Please see how it goes the next day or three, around the typical and not-so-typical stuff: how intense do the reactions get?  How long do they last?  Even when desire is weakened, the gap still manages to get bridged: habits are hard things to break... 

As stuff comes up, is it in your face or a bit at arm's length?  Does it feel like you're in the play reading some lines, or out in the audience saying with a bit of objectivity saying "ooh, I bet I know what happens next...".

Also, how do things compare to a couple weeks ago, with your friend? your ex, etc.?  Do those seem somewhat distant issues/memories?  If so, is there some doubt as to whether they will stay there at a distance?  What does it feel like to bring them to mind and not go into them?

Look forward to your next post :-)

- - - - - - - -

I was talking to another friend today as we went for a walk.  Explaining the process, as I explained I remembered I feel an “urge” just before my diaphragm contracts.  By urge I mean that the yum/yuk response has a feeling, maybe a surge of movement whether it’s toward/or pushing away. Is that what you mean by the ‘tug’? is this ‘thing’ I’ve been looking for? 

Anyway it seems that looking for that urge or even surge of whatever, and failing that the diaphragm contraction may be the amber light to stop new craving/aversion, and my run out groove can be the red light for buying into old stories that arise.

I feel really calm.  No cravings, no irritations.

I’m not counting my chickens yet, I’m a bit under the weather, so maybe it’s just my mood and the virus combining in false calm.

Re: how do things compare to a couple weeks ago, with your friend?,  your ex, etc.?  Do those seem somewhat distant issues/memories?  If so, is there some doubt as to whether they will stay there at a distance?  What does it feel like to bring them to mind and not go into them?

These seem very distant issues/memories, no I think they will stay at a distance.  Bringing them to mind makes them feel like they are just memories, in fact almost like they happened to someone else.  I feel completely emotionally detached from them.  Which is fab.

I will let you know how things are in a few days, what comes up and whether it’s at arm’s length etc.  I need to experience some real ‘now’ issues and see what happens.

Let me know if finally I’ve cracked the “thing” the “tug” sufficiently as far as you’re concerned.  Or whether I have to go back into “I don’t understand”  (I think if you reply “nah you still don’t understand” I will just laugh!)

- - - - - - - -

Diagnoses over email can be a challenge, but your words ring true :-)  Good job!

That surge of what I would call "ooh, I should..." is a good example of the tug, that incipient craving/aversion that you might have previously just gone with, but now there is some space to look at it and go "meh, not so much...".  It's what happens first, even before physical symptoms like the tightening in the diaphragm.  

However, the "thing" searched for has always been that elusive thing called 'desire', which is a misinterpretation of the tug, if you will.  Sure, there is an energy surge, memories rise up, etc., but is there anything actually behind it, making any sort of reaction necessary?  The answer is a resounding 'no', and if you can stay with just the tug rather than the fully-bloomed set of reactions, you can see there's nothing behind it all.  It may be fruitful to reflect on how you still want to know what the "thing" is you've been looking for, perhaps a bit like seeing through self but still wondering where the "thing" is that you were searching for.  Habits are tough to break! 

Maybe a good phrase to work with would be "I don't understand this... so what?" and watch the incipient push/pull fizzle out, and wonder what all the fuss was about (over and over again...).  

Once the shift happens, what I call a "glide path" is next, where there will be updrafts here and there, but gravity will eventually win out, over the course of weeks/months/etc.  It can take quite a while, depending on how much 'exquisite crap' you have, trying out new ways of (not-)doing things, and learning to trust that you are more than fine just letting things be the way they are.  I kept up with my phrase, reminding myself on a regular basis to look for what's behind the current reaction/response, since a first seeing only weakens the reflex.  Letting go doesn't mean you're a pushover, but rather you can better see what the best response to a situation is, and that it is often no particular response at all.  If you stop reacting, there is an opportunity to be of benefit to others :-)

- - - - - - - -

I delayed from immediate response in case there was anything to say or ask... but at the moment there isn’t.

So far so good, much less selfing, and almost immediate noticing of the tug, or if not that, then diaphragm tension. At which point I’m stopping each time and looking at what is simply happening in experience.  Generally, I’m in DE more, so it’s all good.   Funnily enough, not just those scenarios but all memories at the moment seem to belong to someone else – I wonder if that will last? Or start to come back just as selfing increased with time.  I guess the more I’m in DE, the less time for all the ol’ stuff anyway.

I realise this is just the beginning and I will keep looking.  But I feel I have my tools now.   I will let you know how things progress, when there is anything significant to note. 

But in the meantime, I guess that’s it isn’t it?  

I think the daily DP thing is great.  I shall miss it!

Thank you so much for working with me, and helping me so much...  thank you! thank you!

- - - - - - - -

Glad things continue to go well!  No one has reported a reverse gear in this, so get used to it...

It could be that the memories will stay with the sense that they belong to someone else... or perhaps that they are something that can be "owned" in the first place?  The Buddha sometimes described this phase as getting rid of "my-making" - that your experience is something owned and therefore you have a say over what should or should not be a part of it.  

So yes, the daily regime is likely just coming back to DE whenever you feel the tug, and also recognizing (and perhaps celebrating) when adrenaline or other signs indicate that you are responding differently.  There are perhaps lotsa habits to cycle through, but you're in shed mode, not accumulate mode :-)

It has been my pleasure and honor in this with "you" :-)  Do keep dropping me a line every few days on how it's going.  

- - - - - - - -

(a few days later)

I’m glad to hear the absence of “reverse gears” Smile.

Anyway, so far so good here. 

Lots just happening here. ...the worldly winds tried their best yesterday... something that ‘should’ have been painful, just resulted in an arising of compassion.  It feels different. I guess again time will tell.

- - - - - - - -

Good to hear from you, and glad the worldly winds don't seem to blow very hard any more.  It's not like you're insensitive, but perhaps better able to engage and help others not that you're not reacting so strongly?  It seems like up until now the reactions have been more of a chatter in the background?

Do you find yourself continuing on with the same sort of looking when stuff comes up?  It may not always be kind to kick something when it's down, but in the case of desire and ill will, I believe there is a loophole to that rule... :-)

- - - - - - - -

Yes indeed to all the first paragraph and I’m still looking.  Watch this space as they say!

- - - - - - - -

(a few more days later)

Well it was all going so well... then I fell back into an old habit with my Mum! i.e. getting cross and reacting when she started to have a go for no reason, but afterwards just felt compassion for her rather than ‘poor me’.   But apart from that all is still good.  

- - - - - - - -

Alas, to be expected :-)  That stuff arises is one thing, what you do with it is another.  It should evaporate fairly quickly, even if strong reactions do arise.

Give it a few weeks or months and let the Teflon continue to take hold.  Maybe even have some fun with it :-)

--

Desire and Ill Will - Sample Dialogue 3
Inquiry into Desire and Ill Will
​
Hi Kevin. I’ve been looking at your article on desire and ill will.  Are you saying: look and see there is no inherent connection, nothing findable within what is simply happening in experience, which connects the vedana with the reaction to it?  Just stories/thoughts, or some unfindable conditioned knee-jerk...

Sometimes I find it hard to distinguish the vedana from the craving.  There's the vedana… then craving/aversion, manifesting as thoughts and clenching in the body.  But then that clenching itself has a vedana, and then there's a reaction to that…  Any tips?

- - - - -

Hi!  Yes, that is exactly what I’m saying :-)  

I think the hardest part is staying with just the first dart - what you see that you really want or don't like, and the initial physical and mental sensations that inevitably go with that.  Sometimes, the physical sensations are easier to stay with.  Also, by phrasing things in the negative, there may be less of a tendency to go into reactions, thus the craving/aversion doesn't kick in.  

So, for craving, let's use chocolate.  As you sit and think about chocolate, or you walk by a chocolate shop and see and smell the chocolate, what are the initial physical and mental sensations?  There may be what feels like an urge to do something, a visceral and even unpleasant full-body feeling that demands action?  Watching what is happening in the body can be more straightforward than parsing thoughts and images that come up.  The habitual tendency is to act on that sensation, even though it has no specific content. 

As for staying with the basic mental/thought sensations, phrased in the negative, it's simply a matter of "I don't have chocolate right now".  OK, so what?  Why does that have to lead to any further reaction?  This is different from saying "I want chocolate!", which merely reinforces the craving.  By staying with what's actually happening, that isn't what you want, the physical sensations can recur as well.  

- - - - -

The 'So what, why does that have to lead to any further reaction?' feels like the nub of it.  More soon.

- - - - -

If you'd like, I can help clarify what it is you're saying "so what?" to - that can be the tricky part sometimes...

- - - - -

Here’s one; I messed up so didn't get a place on a day retreat that I would love to have done!

‘I'm not doing that retreat I wanted to go on’

Initially very strong sensations; pronounced pouting, clenching in belly etc; plus a straining 'forward' - a tantrum-like volition.  Reminded me of when frustration used to bring imagining of throwing a brick through a window! Except this time there was nothing specific imagined.  There was a directionality, straining, but with just a generalised sense of wanting to move away from current experience. 

'I'm not doing that retreat I wanted to go on'

So what, why does that have to lead to any further reactions?

I could see that what led to the reactions was an imagining of the day, especially my friends there. Plus imagining that today would be less inspiring when not on the retreat.  Thoughts of 'if only I'd x, y'. 

At one point I felt the dukkha of it. i.e., rather than tantrum there was knowing that it is thus, i.e. there is dukkha - bringing soft openness.

At one point, I was with 'I'm not doing the retreat' and not moving away from the moment, not thinking.  Then there was no reaction, neutrality. 

Right now:  

Reactions: a dull flat disappointment.  Face is without expression, heavy.  Breathing shallow, restricted.  Clenching, energy feels low, suppressed.
Repeating 'I'm not doing'…
'So what?'

Initial reaction was a smile… feeling the ridiculousness of craving for spiritual experiences!! 

Queasiness in the belly, from conflicting urges… some clinging to 'business as usual' in there… a glimpse of freedom… a fear of it being boring if I don't seek out what I want.  

This is rather long, I hope that's ok.

- - - - -

This is good!  That straining forward that seems to require you to do or say something, even if nothing specific is being imagined: that's what I suggest staying with.  True, we usually come up with something to do or say, thus craving and aversion blossom.  However, staying with “I'm not...” can allow you to stay with that unpleasant vedana, that content-free URGE (the word I usually use) and look for the reason why you have to respond, even as one or more specific reactions are trying to ramp up.  It might also help see how desire and ill will are two sides of the same coin: you want what you want, and get upset when that's not the case.  Both a pulling and pushing at experience.  

As you saw, no reaction is necessary: neutrality/equanimity is available as an option.  And yes, it can seem ridiculous: perhaps an image of a three-year-old writhing on the floor in a tantrum, screaming “but I'm not at that retreat today!!”, as if that's got some inherent meaning.  I think you've directly pointed yourself well through this!

A question: is seeking out what you want to keep life interesting/not boring an underlying tendency/necessity?  In other words, is something like “Life isn't always interesting” a more fundamental form of desire, a fact you regularly have difficulty saying “so what??” to?  The reason I ask is that the retreat is now over and done with, and thus has perhaps already lost a lot of the energy behind it.  Is there a more “chronic” or fundamental sort of issue that you can reliably summon to work with?

PS: the three-year-old on the floor refers to a very vivid impression I had of myself, not you...  

- - - - -

Hi, three year old it is....with spectacular pout. Inner tantrums arise easily here. Applied your process to a probate letter I sent not arriving. Notice there's some illusion of potency in the tantrum... and denial of the reality of not being able to do anything about the said non-arrival.

The aversion side of the coin is nearly always felt more intensely.

A more chronic or fundamental issue... No control, having to lump it. 'There's nothing to be done about this'. Or another one would be: 'Again and again we cause ourselves and each other suffering'. The resistance to that is less tantrum, more subtle, a cooler more perplexed warding off, shutting out of that truth. I think a lot of craving/aversion that presents is underpinned by one of those two.

Noticing there's no-one there that wants or doesn't sort of cuts the root, creates a perplexed open space… but doesn't stop the reaction happening in the first place.

- - - - -

Ah, glad there are other three year olds in the world!

A suggestion is to let your sense of “me” be “real” for now, since you’re holding what’s happening to be so real as well.  Even once the illusory ego/self evaporated, we still identify with experience quite strongly.  I take solace that, with the 8th fetter, one is still grappling with the illusion “I Am”, thus everything up to that point is some sort of “selfing”.  To say at this point “heck, there’s no one here” may be a little spiritual bypassing?

If a fundamental issue is “I can’t control what’s happening”, let’s work with that.  Without focusing on a particular situation out of your control, but just the basic fact that you’re not in control, what first happens in experience?  What is the “felt sense” of that, before the grosser physical manifestations of tightening, etc. occurs?  Is there that urge to think/say/do something?  If so, what does that urge feel like?  If you go off into thoughts and other reactions, try coming back to just the phrase “I can’t control what’s happening”.

And what does the mechanism feel like by which the initial responses arise: does it feel like a button gets pushed, a switch is flipped, a programme runs, etc.?  Whatever it is, it obviously won’t show up on an x-ray, but it seems like there is “something in here somewhere”, no?  How would you describe the mechanism that converts the basic fact that you can’t control what is happening and makes it mean something in particular to you?

- - - - -

Great, thanks, super clear.  Will investigate.  But 'I can't control what's happening' is not in the abstract having enough effect! 'I can't prevent suffering' feels more instantly juicy, so thinking to use that? 

- - - - -

By all means go with what has juice, that can get the urge going even if you're not in the middle of watching suffering arising (in which case staying with the urge may be difficult anyway, since reactions are likely coming up).  

So, "I can't prevent suffering" - where in what is simply happening in experience is the mechanism or reason that has to mean anything: why do you HAVE to react?  If it feels like a button is being pushed, where is that button?  If words or images come up, those are reactions starting to bubble up: try and stay with the unpleasant sense of what it basically feels like, physically and psychically, to know you can't prevent suffering, and tell me exactly where and what that mechanism/reason is that necessitates a reaction.  If a little juice is needed, maybe bring to mind a past instance where this fact played out.  This isn't of course about being indifferent or callous to what is happening, anything but.  Rather, why do you have to react or respond in any particular way??  

- - - - -

Ok so have been looking at this and various other manifestations of craving/aversion.  

I've been finding it hard to spot the vedana of thoughts.  It's all so quick.  Harder to see the vedana of a thought than the vedana of a sensation through one of the other senses.  Especially when you are not having a 'spontaneous' thought but saying something to yourself and feeling in to the meaning of that. 

Somewhere I read that vedana is neither sensation (which is contact), nor a perception - it is between the two and distinct from both.  

Anyway, the aversive reaction to 'I can't prevent suffering' seems to begin with queasiness which feels like the beginning of adrenaline; then follows either a more angry reaction or a more depressed reaction.  The depressed one is as I described before, body feels heavy, frozen, face immobile… clenching, but with a cooler more inward-focused energy, sort of caving inwards, body sense of dejection.  Angry one: tighter clenching, jaw tight… a sense of wanting to move forward, away, and that goes with an ignoring of DE.  The urge to move feels as if it's created by an imagining of the body moving forward.  It's as if the imagining creates a tension between the reality of the body's current stationary position and the imagined movement or direction.  The result is a sense of frustration, of wanting to complete something.

There were a couple of tiny windows where I could see the fabricated nature of my reaction.  I could see that the reaction is just some sensations in the body creating a sense of urge, of urgency.  Nothing more.  No mechanism or reason that a reaction has to happen.  

Recently I was quite cold, so I looked quite a bit at the vedana of cold.  The aversion felt instinctual, so that the clenching was almost a reflex.

- - - - -

I think you did some very valuable looking here.  

When you say to yourself “I can’t prevent suffering”, and the queasiness-cum-adrenaline manifests: that’s basically the place to be.  Before the anger, thoughts, etc. start up: that almost visceral sense of what it basically feels like to know that you can’t prevent suffering.  There’s that strong urge to “DO SOMETHING”, as if you absolutely should or have to.  You may not even have a clear idea what it is you should be saying or doing, but the urge is there nonetheless.  That’s the “zone”.  It’s typically a very unpleasant place to be, which may be why we go on to the reactions to get out of that zone.  By not reacting as you normally do, there may be the message “but… but… I can’t prevent suffering!!”, as if that has to mean anything in particular. 

Staying with the phrase and the associated (not so pleasant) sensations, and also recognizing that reactions are uber-ready to take off, you’re in the gap.  In a way, you’ve got one hand gripping the phrase/sensations as an anchor, and the other hand is being pulled on by the incipient reactions, such that you’re suspended over the gap.  If there was something that connected sensation and reaction, that made the reactions necessary or inevitable, this is the place to look, since both condition and effect are both present. 

So, where is that mechanism?  It might feel like a button that’s getting pushed, or in more general terms it’s the “reason” you HAVE to say/think/do something about this.  It won’t show up on an x-ray, but there certainly seems to be something there nonetheless.  Looking deeply and patiently, do you find anything of the sort?

- - - - -

Hi, looking this eve.  Felt a clear sense of it all, the sentence, the queasiness, the urge, being suspended in the gap.  There were moments when the sentence just felt true, and there was peace.  Also moments when it felt meaningless... because no 'I', and even if I changed it to 'suffering can't be prevented', 'prevent', 'suffering' seemed like just words.  No moments when any reason why the reactions are necessary or inevitable, or any 'mechanism' was seen.  Will keep looking.

- - - - -

Hi!  Good that the clarity on what was actually happening, and only that, was there.  And yes, the sentence is true, no matter how you phrase it.  

A suggestion: let there be an "I" here, at least at the relative level, rather than saying "oh well, I really don't exist, so the issue itself isn't real either".  If the inability to prevent suffering leads to a response, it's pretty real at the moment, no?  

Can you bring the phrase to mind, and the attendant sensations, and in the gap of not reacting say/ask "So What?"  This doesn't mean you're callous or indifferent, but that you're insisting or demanding that experience show you why exactly this fact has to mean anything in particular.  No assumptions or inferences, or comparing how others respond.  "OK, I can't prevent suffering: so what?  Show me the reason!"  

Look forward to hearing what you find  

- - - - -

I wasn't deliberating recalling 'no I'; it was just there was a patch where the sentence fell apart, lost meaning, was seen as just words.  Then the meaning came back in.

- - - - -

I would still suggest the "so what" inquiry...

- - - - -

Yes, sounds good, will do! Thanks v much for your clarity and encouragement.

- - - - -

Noticed myself pouting and tried to feel what the essence of that was.  It boiled down to: 'Things are not as I'd want them to be'.  So I've also been working a bit with that statement, which seems to evoke aversion more strongly and clearly, without any need to bring in examples for juice.

'So what?'  'Why is the reaction necessary or inevitable?' 

There's a satisfying sense of being right on the button with this - as well as the unpleasantness of being suspended over the gap.  There's again a range of possible reactions, varieties of sadness and anger.  There are moments where the truth of the statement is simply known, and then it's clear that the reaction is not necessary or inevitable.  In those moments there is heart softening and there is the space and stopping of thought which I have found comes immediately after insight/clarity.

- - - - -

This sounds very good.  

"Things are not as I'd want them to be" sounds much more fundamental.  

Suspended over the gap, with the button actively being pressed as it were: look down within what is simply happening in experience - is there really a button there?  Watching what is happening in experience (heart softening, noticing of space and clarity, realizing that a reaction is not necessary) is valuable.  However, try to keep coming back to the looking for the button/reason itself: is there anything there?  Has there ever been?  

Maybe mention the phrase a couple times: "things are not as I'd want them to be" - is there anything you can find that necessarily makes that mean anything in particular?

- - - - -

I am looking and not finding, but that not finding is not shifting anything yet. ... it's not like I really see it.

- - - - -

When you find nothing, what happens to the issue: are there any reactions that mature into craving or aversion?

- - - - -

Looking again.  There is the basic unpleasantness of knowing the statement.  Sometimes my attention is wholly with that, and there are no reactions, or hardly any.  There is often the pout - I'm not sure whether that counts as basic unpleasantness or as reaction.  

Then usually there are incipient reactions - starting with nausea, then clenching etc.  I can't find any reason why these reactions have to follow, anything making them arise.  Yet seeing that doesn't stop the issue being live.

I feels as if this is cooking, somehow, but it feels a bit like fumbling in the dark.  

The more reaction, the less the statement is allowed, the less it's felt as truth.

- - - - -

Is it possible to just stay with the basic unpleasantness, not even the pout?  If the pout, nausea, clenching, etc. start up - can you come back to the phrase and do a "re-set" of sorts?  If you're eyes are closed, maybe open them briefly.  It seems like you are able to just be with the basic unpleasantness of the fact for a bit, then the reactions start to creep in.  Staying with just the basic sensations is very much the challenge here - I think you're doing well  

If you intone the phrase "I can't lift a lorry in the air", there's probably little to no reaction, since there's probably little if anything that meets that fact and makes it mean anything in particular.  With "things are not as I'd want them to be", what steps out to meet that fact as it were: where does it come from?  Does it seem to come from your head?  Your heart?  

Interesting that it feels like it is cooking: if this rather fundamental issue hasn't been clarified and focused on before, there may be some getting used to it, such that reactions don't as easily creep in here and there.  

"The more reaction, the less the statement is allowed, the less it's felt as truth."  Very well put!  

When you say it is like fumbling in the dark: is there any expectation as to what this search could or should be like?  If you did a similar search for the "self", did it feel like fumbling in the dark?

- - - - -

I'm not minding the fumbling in the dark overly.  There's an element of 'not sure I'm on track', but also an element of 'Fruitful Darkness'... fruitful not knowing. Searching for the self felt simpler.  Doubts sometimes: 'I don't have sufficient clarity to see this'… but doubt is a favourite, bound to come up in some form.  

I have worked with craving/aversion/vedana reasonably intensively before, but not for quite a while, and this approach is more intense and stretching. 

But today's been a great looking day! 

I've been getting a similar thing to when I searched for self.  A feeling of following the scent of truth; clearly sensing the truth as opposed to the inauthenticity or artificiality of the self-view or here, the reactions.  Even the basic clenching reaction to cold has that same flavour of inauthenticity, I think.  Maybe that's a visceral sense of the illusion of separation, how that's not the truth… not sure. 

'Where does reaction arise from - head or heart?'  Was away today and only just got your message, but I'd written in my journal that it's been feeling like a heart thing; the move away from the truth and into reaction is a closing down of the heart.  And separately, I noticed it feels at times as if the reactions start with a move away from DE into mentation.  BUT when looking at aversion to cold, I can't find that mentation, if it's there it feels below the radar.  Last week I was struggling to distinguish the sensations of cold from the sensations of clenching around them, but today I could distinguish them more, and somehow sense the clenching as optional, even though I often couldn't actually stop it.  

I think the mentation might just be a very primitive 'me' ing pulse… can't see this clearly.

- - - - -

Let's try to stay in the heart, where it seems these reactions arise out of.  As you bring the phrase to mind, what seems to happen first, after which the reactions start to develop? Staying at that initial unpleasant sensation, what does the mechanism feel or seem like?  Is it like a programme runs, a switch gets flipped, a button gets pushed?  What sense do you get of the mechanism, as if it's tuned to this sort of unpleasant fact, such that the reactions start up?  

Of course, it's not like it would show up on an x-ray, but if the reactions reliably start up, it's as if something senses and interprets that basic knowledge/fact and makes it mean something in particular.

So, what does it seem like is in there somewhere, triggering the reactions and allowing them to proceed?

- - - - -

It's so hard to see clearly.  I get palpitations a lot at the moment, plus I'm cold most of the time, and those sensations are like background noise making it harder to see. 

Re expectations, there's a hope the process will all unfold as you described it, with a dramatic boom! and consciousness re-booting and everything - and that's probably unhelpful!  

I notice stuff that also came up with the LU process.  Self-doubt, I don't have enough clarity to do this, it's taking up too much of my guide's time.  

If I bring the phrase to mind with my heart fully open to its meaning, there is no discernible reaction, I can feel, know the reality of dukkha.  Then if I'm no longer opening to the reality with a soft heart, there's reaction… at the moment it's beginning with the pout and tightening of jaw, and yes that does feel as if an old programme is rolling out.  I can't seem to get any more clarity at the moment about the mechanism.  There must be an interpretation of the basic knowledge/fact, but I can't actually catch that happening at the moment.

- - - - -

First, you are NOT taking up too much of my time - it's absolutely my privilege to be able to do this.  And I think you do have the clarity to do this – you're seeing what's happening in DE very well!  

There can be palpitations, some adrenalin, or other physiological responses when bringing to mind unpleasant (or pleasant) stuff but not doing/thinking/saying what you normally do.  It's as if there's something wrong – ack!  (just curious - as to being cold, are you doing this outdoors?)  

Also, sometimes there is a noticeable re-boot etc., and sometimes not, when things fall into place.  Not sure what LU was like for you, but seeing through "self" here was not a discernible event at all.

That's great that the mechanism seems like a programme is rolling out, interpreting that basic fact.  Brilliant!  Once that programme starts to roll out, that the reactions start with perhaps a slight pout and a tight jaw is also quite valuable – they can give you an idea of when to come back to the phrase, or maybe open your eyes for a moment and then settle back in.

You intuitively feel it be be a programme – let's leave it at that, rather than trying to get any of the details about the programme.  As you notice the phrase and the basic sensations only to the extent that the urge to do/say/think something arises, just relax and search within DE for the programme itself.  If it seems like it's in the heart centre area, perhaps look there first, but give some attention to the rest of the mind/body too.  

If the urge is there, all the conditions are lined up, but no discernible reactions for a period of time, what does that tell you?

- - - - -

Thanks Kevin, that's very reassuring. Thank you.

The palpitations have been going on a lot of the time for many months now, and it's unclear from tests whether they have a physical basis, possibly they do. 

Re cold… I'm inside, just feel the cold a lot! 

Sitting after I posted, there was far clearer seeing of interpretation/recognition/samjna!  I realized that sometimes it's very basic - it's just a label that amounts to 'no', a 'recognition' of an experience as 'fitting' a pre-existing story, then the story rolls out. I went through the same thing with LU; when trying to see 'I' as a thought, a label, it took ages to see that this can be a very crude process that is just a flash of mentation that amounts to a "recognition" of 'me', or in longhand, 'there's me again, those familiar sensations that are me'. 

Will post again later re your latest question.

- - - - -

That’s great that you see how it starts with the recognition of something that fits a familiar pattern, after which the programme runs, and the story rolls out.  Instead of a quick recognition of “me” as on LU, now it’s a quick recognition of “oh, that issue”?  

In essence, the challenge is to stay with “oh, that issue”, and whatever sensations get kicked up such that the urge to respond in some way arises.  This is perhaps as opposed to “OMG, it’s that issue which is so gawdawfully…”.  

If you can stay in a rather neutral space with the fact and sensations, aware of the reactions that might otherwise start up (and may be tugging at your arm), where is the programme that seems to run: can you find it?  Is there actually something inside you somewhere that requires or necessarily leads to any response to that fact?

- - - - -

Hmm, will try again tomorrow, too tired. Btw the heart thing, it wasn't that the programme is felt in the heart, it's that staying in the heart makes it easier to stay with the unpleasant/initial statement. The programme is a move away from the heart.

- - - - -

Sounds good.  And yes, look everywhere that the programme might be! 

- - - - -

Hi, great sit this morning, really seeing/feeling reactivity as optional!  Feeling the freedom in that. A glimpse of truth.  Also a real allowing of dukkha.

The various reactivity programmes seem to be King.  Then when I resoften the heart and move back into just allowing, it reveals that there is another option. 

Right now I can feel the resistance to this: 'surely, surely, surely?' 'but, but, but'.  An inertia, holding on to the familiar.

- - - - -

Very good to read this.  Yes, a definite freedom in being able to just be with what is happening, rather than going off with all the reactions that seem so necessary and inevitable.  Sitting in that neutral space, that we put ourselves through so much unnecessary stuff is seen.  As the “surelys” and “buts” arise, does it feel like being in a state of dynamic tension?

“Holding onto the familiar”: exactly.  We identify with the reactions and say “this is me, this is mine”.  The "self" that evaporated before was like a summary label slapped on all the exquisite crap rising and falling underneath.  And yet, this neutral and free space is always available, where it's all seen as optional. 

So, keeping the heart soft, and narrowing attention down to intoning 'things are not as I'd want them to be', within that free and “pre-reactive” state, where is the particular programme that seems to run?  Each “but...” and “surely...” seem to offer proof that this mechanism exists, but does it?  Has it ever?  Do you really have to react in any way?

- - - - -

YES, a state of dynamic tension describes it well.  

The 'buts' and 'surely'… I see that one of those 'buts' is… 'Isn't this bypassing? Surely all this stuff needs to be given more space to be felt'.  Whereas I guess it's really the initial vedana that needs to be given space.

- - - - -

Long 'beditation' this morning full of amazingness.  

Found neutrality re 'Things are not….'  The reactive programme could not be found.  It is not necessary.  I also worked with other things, as they arose.  Eg 'My Mum died'… varying degrees of equanimity, unsurprisingly!  At one point the equanimity brought a formless-style absorbed state, a place that's often arrived at through different routes.  There I hit a 'but'.  It felt too 'neutral'.  This triggered a fear which arose when I spoke to someone else a few weeks back about his experience of this.  His description of how the neutrality was too much to bear affected me, and there's still fear from that.  When he and I spoke, I mentioned someone else describing that neutrality as 'an acquired taste'.  

Also, I found recently that when 'awareness itself' feels flat and lacking heart, it's that there is some subtle holding still.  So today I softened further in the heart, remembered the awareness quality of sensitivity, and Amitabha, and then it was different, there was the raw, undefended soft spot, anukampa, compassion.

In that space I could feel into the more visceral level of aversion, separation, selfing; e.g. I was hungry so worked with that, and found equanimity in that too.

'Buts' are of various kinds.  There's the 'aren't i bypassing', the fear of grey neutrality.  When I reread what I wrote, 'the reactivity is not necessary' there is a 'surely, surely', attachment to 'my' reactivity programmes.  I don't want to see and say that it's not necessary!

When you described the 'gap' tension as 'dynamic', I realized it affected my experience of it… I would have more labelled it 'horrible'!  So I could see another arrow of aversion in there, based on the perception 'horrible', which shifted when an alternative perception, 'dynamic' was offered!  (Though I still revert to 'horrible'). This made me realize that I've expected the gap to be comfortable, free from unpleasantness… it sounds like an empty space, yet it's full of tension and urges… When it's not, there's equanimity and therefore no clinging to have a gap between.

- - - - -

Ooh a day with intense reactivity, showing me where I'm at!  A very strong trigger of something That Is Not As I Would Want It To Be, a favourite.... Over several hours there was sadly only one moment when I could manage to open to the basic painfulness... but that one moment of opening my heart, softening, did have a big effect, basically I stopped boycotting what was going on and re-engaged.  I think that what gets in the way is identification with not putting up with things being poor, and the illusion that if I vent and rant on about how poor the day was, how much better if could have been, that will actually help matters.

- - - - -

It's really hard to let it be 'It wasn't as I wanted' rather than 'It was rubbish'.

- - - - -

I didn't know 'beditation' had a name!  Glad it's a recognized practice  

Yes, give the vedana some space instead of seizing and acting on it, so you can see it for what it is.  

Maybe see neutrality as 'equanimity'?  If you're used to experiencing opposites of considerable joy and sadness, embracing and rejection, this more subtle flavor might be an acquired taste?  

If awareness feels flat, it may be flatter than you are used to, or maybe there is expectation of what you should be feeling, how this will look/, etc.?

Bypassing here might take the form of “there's really nothing here to react to, so I'll just shut the door on all this reactivity”.  I don't see you doing that: maybe it's that you think something should be there, you should be feeling/thinking a certain way, etc., thus it feels like you're bypassing something?

And yes, it's just the underlying tension and urges from not (yet) seeing everything as it really is.  It seems we are wired for this to feel inherently uncomfortable (even horrible?).  If before it was a matter of feeling compelled to assemble a "self" to make sense of it all, here it is the urge to nevertheless exert some control.  

So yes, by letting sensations be sensations and things be things, there's no gap, just a discontinuity or precipice of sorts, which you can stop at and say “no thanks” to the potential reactions?  One person described it as knowing how long a barking dog's leash is, and just remaining a few inches out of reach and staring into its eyes without fear or compulsion to act.  

On your last message, it's much more difficult to open to equanimity in the moment, so be glad you managed it once: working with it in meditation is hard enough.  

So, assuming you have some time alone now or later today, as you look at all the “usual suspects” that aren't as the “should be”, is there any reason to react to them in any way?  Is there a programme or other mechanism you can find in DE that takes the basic awareness of what is happening and converts it to “I have to think/say/do...”?  Has there ever been such a thing?

- - - - -

RE bypassing; I think there is a 'shouldn't be feeling the aversion' which has the flavour of bypassing. But mostly I think it's as you suggest, it's just the stories demanding airplay and claiming that to not be given it is bypassing! 

Despite no self, 'The urge to nonetheless exert some control' - YES that feels spot on.

Is there a precipice where it's possible to say 'no thanks'?  It feels as if there's a precipice in terms of allowing the clenching to turn into think/say/do, ie grasping, but the basic pout/clenching doesn't feel like a 'no thanks' thing.  

It's SO challenging! Seeing various times, nothing in DE that necessitates the reaction… but feel that needs to be seen a few zillion times more!  Feeling very fruitful, guess I just need to keep doing what you keep pointing to!

- - - - -

Hmmm... instead of a precipice, maybe envision yourself on a leash.  When desire and ill will are weakened, it's an elastic leash that allows you to reach tanha, especially the pout and clenching which are nearest, but you also tend to get snapped back.  The equilibrium position is in vedana, even if some wild excursions are possible.  Eventually the leash hardens into a rope: you see possible reactions, but you reach the end of your leash at vedana, and simply can't go any further.  

Perhaps the operative concept is that the reactions are seen as optional, and the “undeniable” urge to think/say/do something is suddenly deniable, even if just partially at first.  What used to be a fait accompli softens into a compulsion, then habit, and so on as you put less and less self-referencing energy and interest into the reactions.  

Thinking back to the other day, 'It wasn't as I wanted' versus 'It was rubbish': how does that feel at this moment??

- - - - -

I really like the leash metaphor, thank you…very clear, makes me realize progress is happening.  

I've been really noticing how the aversion to aversion, 'Oh there's the clenching again, damn' gets in the way, it brings a harshness, so then have to welcome and soften around the aversion, before I can then reel the leash back to the basic vedana.  

I see that still energy goes into trying to avoid the aversion by force, which just brings more tension, and diverts from the looking to see how nothing makes it necessary, the discontinuity.  

'It wasn't as I wanted' versus 'It was rubbish'.  Right now, 'It wasn't as I wanted' is felt, with softness, wistfulness, some flatness/sadness - ie a 'cool' rather than the 'hot' reaction.  'No, it was just rubbish' - ie my perspective is reality - is making little attempts, but they are weak, and mostly it's seen as flimsy… the 3 year old!  

Looking at this since Saturday, the self-referencing has been so clear - how I identify with being critical, not putting up with rubbish, passionately holding out for excellence.

Earlier I worked with strong hunger pangs.  There was some fear in response - I guess a basic 'if eating is seen as optional, survival is threatened!'

Sometimes when I soften it feels like a switch, the basic issue is suddenly simply known rather than meaning something…. then a reactive interpretation comes, it switches back.

- - - - -

Perhaps the possibility of craving and aversion being completely done is tantalizing?  Hopes and expectations (i.e. craving and aversion) around craving and aversion – we are so talented!!  Glad the “what I wanted/rubbish” scenario is staying soft. 

And yes, identifying with experience: that’s basically what it is.  In the case of eating, of course you will continue to eat, but maybe the question is: does craving and aversion have to come into play?  

Your analogy of a switch is a good one, and may be a good image as to how to respond to craving and aversion when they arise.  Get used to turning the switch off, however it is you are able to come back to what is actually happening in experience.  I asked myself “why is this coming up?” when I became aware of some pushing or pulling at experience, looking for what was behind the reactions (and of course never found anything).  It eventually shortened to “Why?” – I was so used to asking the question and doing a little looking that the internal process became second nature.  

How do you feel about people in general at the moment?  More connected and/or inclined to them, feeling a bit more separation, about the same?

- - - - -

Well, interesting you should ask how I'm feeling about people, as I am noticing a difference today, less aversive generally, softer, to people and everything.  Also the sense of a 'here' and 'there' has been shifting the last couple of days...  

It's feels astonishing that I haven't thought to ask the 'why?' before! 

I'm thinking… OK, the old doubt samskara must be about to kick in big time!

- - - - -

Glad the whole "other people" thing is going well.  Be curious what you mean by 'here and there' shifting?

Yes, why not ask why it is the case?  Maybe because we are so used to stating that it is the case?

As you encounter people and issues which have given rise to aversion, what does it feel like to not do what you might normally have done?  Are there any internal scripts that run, perhaps "hey, why aren't you..." or "something's wrong: I should be..."?  Does it feel like working without a net, are there little adrenaline rushes, or other symptoms of being in strange territory?

- - - - -

Last night after posting I found it all feeling beautifully clear and simple.  Equanimity. Reactivity readily dissolving with the 'why, or what in DE makes that necessary?'  Delight and freedom.  Much the same today so far.  Some sort of ebullience, pride, then some shame, aversion to that, then that's seen.  Somehow a doorway has opened and I get what you have been pointing to, simply.  There's some fear of losing that clarity!  And occasional thoughts like 'this is just a bubble and when it bursts it's going to be grim'!

What's it feeling like to not do what I'd normally do. Great!  

Overall, there's a peacefulness, though at the same time a subtle edge of manic ebullient restlessness!!  There's an edge of quiet joy at times, plus an incredulity; just like no self, it CANNOT be so simple. 

The 'here and there' thing… it's so hard to describe.  So I've been aware of a remaining sense of self that boils down to a sense of location, 'something here', i.e. some ongoing identification with sensations in the face/head which are then 'joined up' by a mental mapping, and 'recognised' as 'here' aka 'me'.  I find it really hard to 'get' that mental mapping, I think it's more a kinesthetic 'map'/thought than a visual one.  When I've looked at it before, I've focused on the sense of 'here', e.g. looked at the impermanence of the sensations.  But then the other day i thought 'but what about the "there", where's that?', and somehow it was clearer there's no 'there', therefore no 'here'.  Rather than on/off it feels like a scale, sometimes quite a lot of here/there, sometimes very little, but overall less at the moment.

- - - - -

Very good to read this.  No one has reported the bubble bursting, and like the self, how can it?  It’s a Santa Claus moment, if you will.  And like the self, it really is as simple as it turned out to be (which makes guiding easier than I thought it would be…).

As desire and ill will start to give way, the next group of illusions around “existence” beckon, such as duality, “thingness”, etc.  So, no surprise that inquiry into “here and there” is starting to open up.  The sense of “here” is particularly resilient, as is “now”, since space and time are so ingrained in our perspective on experience.  

Moving forward, my suggestion is that you continue to be curious as to “why?” reactions should ever come up, as experience settles into this new paradigm.  There can be a honeymoon phase, after which craving and aversion can seem to creep back in, whereupon you might question “hey, how that could be??!!”  However, it’s as it is now: they arise, but a little mindfulness sees them dissolve away again.  There may even be some very white-hot aversions that rise up: the leash still has a fair amount of give to it  

- - - - -

Yes, it does feel like a Santa moment happened, the clarity has remained, but at the same time it still feels very new, just a beginning.  

Way less reactivity still, but today bit more craving and aversion arising, some dissolving quickly, some needing more looking.  

So many parallels with the anatta process; for example a sense of everything needing re-examining, eg all the favourite dukkha routes, through this new lens. 

What you wrote about 'here and there' was interesting, as that sense of 'here' has been a source of doubt, ie it made me wonder if there was something missing in the seeing through self-view. 

Thank you SO MUCH for your great guiding!! Felt super-supported.  

- - - - -

Yes, just accept that reactions will still occur, and that they can be examined a bit and dissolved.  The enemy may seem to be falling back and regrouping at the moment: the "new and improved" versions of your favorite likes and dislikes will likely be somewhat different.  And yet, the strategy is always the same: just look to see if there's anything behind them.

And exactly: it's another illusion that, looking back, you can see was coloring so much of experience, just like the "self" did.  I always had a sense of entitlement, that I was justified in seeing everything in terms of what I wanted and didn't want.  

- - - - -

Like the military metaphor - the enemy regrouping... not particularly happening yet, although it seems to have slightly numbed me out today, I've forgotten the amazingness of what's happened… but still the reactivity is way less.  

- - - - -

The last week or so there has been a lot of reactivity - my more resilient samskaras coming up.  In particular there was a patch of depression, and for a while it felt as if the new paradigm and the depression samskara were in battle, and the depression felt stronger… but then it largely turned around.  

Somehow a lot of the time currently there is insufficient mindfulness for the new paradigm to operate.  That's disappointing, but at the same time I still know reactivity is optional. 

The level of mindfulness that is there sometimes and becomes the base level whilst doing the DP with you seems to be a necessary component for the realisation to be acted on!

At the same time, the last few days I'm having very deep sits with insight, but nothing that appears to particularly abide.

As I write this I see more clearly how I've had a big construction project the last week or so, building a 'woe is me' tale about a particular instance of things not being as …etc etc.  This is good as I can now avoid telling that tale in a meeting tomorrow and thereby pumping it up and spreading gloom to others.

- - - - -

As I think you're finding, mindfulness is more straightforward now, and its degree and depth will "catch up" with where you're at, so I wouldn't get too discouraged.  Think weeks or months rather than days in order to find a new sort of equilibrium point, such that you are regularly looking at the level of subtlety that corresponds with "where you're currently at".  In a way, the question "so, what does this new perspective mean?" takes some time to integrate, just as did the evaporation of the illusory "self".

As for nothing appearing to abide, even though meditation sits are now very deep: consider that there's less of "you" now, so by comparison it seems like there's hardly anyone "there".  A lot of the drama and content doesn't show up anymore.  What's left of "you" is settling and regrouping, but is still quite able to make its presence known in terms of there being reactions to what's happening.  

On the "woe is me" construction project: does it seem as though a lot of tried and true samskaras as to how you've normally responded to experience are still trying to fire and connect, but that a little mindfulness and clarity eventually has you saying "oops, never mind..."?  

- - - - -

Thanks for the encouragement! 

I'm not sure that mindfulness is more straightforward.  It has been feeling elusive the last week or so.  There's been a prevailing foggy mental state of grumpiness and generalised 'Things are not as….'  The pout has been in place rather a lot!! 

'Think weeks or months rather than days in order to find a new sort of equilibrium point,'
Yes, that's fair enough … of course! 

When I said nothing appears to abide, I meant the Insight not abiding… it's so clear in the sit, but doesn't seem to stick afterwards in any discernible way.  

'does it seem as though a lot of tried and true samskaras as to how you've normally responded to experience are still trying to fire and connect, but that a little mindfulness and clarity eventually has you saying "oops, never mind…"?'

It's more like a whole sub-personality/constellation of samskaras is battling for a comeback!  

I notice how sending it love/softening around it seems to be most effective at the moment… melts the reactivity/pout.

- - - - -

Thanks for this - I like how you describe sending it love and softening as an "antidote" to the reactivity and pouting.  I also have found great value in embracing whatever is happening that might be triggering the reactions: acknowledging that "yep, this is really what's happening - no use in denying it...".  In a way, "owning" what the circumstances of life are in a complete way, rather than seeing them as somehow separate or distinct.  It's got me through some rather anxious times  

- - - - -

Thanks Kevin.  Dukkha re instability in my living situation is readily providing a wonderful opportunity for spiritual growth... and all for free!

- - - - -

I can report that the cycle has come around back to clarity, heart, equanimity.  Quite intense, a tearful few days... seeing more subtle levels of resistance to experience, disguised as spiritual seeking.  A sense of utter longing (not craving) to come home to This.  As Thich Nhat Hanh puts it:  'I have arrived.  I am home.  In the here... and in the now'.